(purification), become the source of steadfastness in Knowledge through the generation of Knowledge, as stated in the Smrti (text), 'Knowledge arises in a person from the attenuation of sinful acts' [\(22\)](#page--1-0) (Mbh. Śā. 204.8). This is the import.

From the statement that one does not attain freedom from action by abstaining from actions, it may be concluded that one attains freedom from action by following the opposite course of performing actions. What, again, is the reason that one does not attain freedom from action by abstaining from actions? The answer is: Because performing actions is itself a means to freedom from action. Indeed, there can be no attainment of an end without (its) means. And Karma-Yog is the means to the Yog of Knowledge characterized by freedom from action, because it has been so established in the Upanisads and here as well. As for the Upanisads, it has been shown in the texts, 'The Brāhmanas seek to know It through the study of the Vedas, sacrifices, (charity, and austerity consisting in a dispassionate enjoyment of sense-objects)' (Br. 4.4.22), etc. which deal with the means of realizing the goal of Knowledge under discussion, namely the Realm of the Self, that the Yog of Karma is a means to the Yog of Knowledge. And even here (in the *Gītā*), the Bhagavān will establish that, 'But, O mighty-armed one, renunciation is hard to attain without (Karma-)Yog' (5.6); 'By giving up attachment, the yogīs undertake work ... for the purification of themselves' (5.11); 'Sacrifice, charity, and austerity are verily the purifiers of the wise' (18.5), etc.

*Objection*: Is it not that in such texts as—'Extending to all creatures immunity from fear' (Nā. Par. 5.43), (one should take recourse to freedom from action)—, it is shown that attainment of freedom from action follows even from the renunciation of obligatory duties? And in the world, too, it is a better known fact that freedom from action follows abstention from actions. Hence also arises the question, 'Why should one who desires freedom from action undertake action?'