## **ON PRACTICE 2I\*J**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

<sup>1</sup> he impotent you a child\*. laden with such **latency** do not develop fully into the glorious knowledge oi Purusa, anti therdoic it returns to its former function on account of its inclination to fluctuation. When the knowledge of Purusa is attained, the occupation of the Buddlii goes. Then having fulfilled its function and being free from misapprehension and having no cause of bondage it docs not appear again (2). Some opponents ridicule the proposition by citing the story of an impotent husband. A devoted wife thus addressed her husband, 'Oh my husband, my sister has a child, why have <sup>1</sup> not one ? one replied, 'After death, I shall beget Similarly, this knowledge while in existence, docs not cause the mind to cease from action ; what hope is there then that it will cause cessation when suppressed ? In reply to this criticism <sup>a</sup> sage says, "Cessation ot the working of the Buddhi is Moksa. When the cause in the shape of Adarsana (want of discriminative knowledge} is removed,\* the activities oT the Buddhi stop-That cause of bondage, *viz-* Adarsana (i.f. no led^e) is removed by Dar^ana (£.\*- knowledge) effect cessation of the activities of the mind is Moksa. There is thus no room for such confusion of thought. know-**In**

**(1) The comments at I-2H art to be seen for a full explanation of the expression Tratyak-Cbetang/J Individual consciousness in the shape of each Ptjru^a is Pratyak-Chetaua,**

**Avidlya means latent impressions of wrong knowledge. Reference may be made to the definition of AvidyS as taking the non-self for self etc. given in connection with the discussion on erroneous knowledge. Generally speaking, regarding Purina and Buddhi as not separate is the wrong knowledge which is the cause of bondage. The latent impression of that knowledge is the primary cause of the union. This contact is without beginning. Thus, there was no such time when there was no alliance. Therefore the cause of the alliance cannot**