## **2B4 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATARjALI**

**knowledge is acquirable only by Yoga, There is a saying in this connection : \*Yoga is to be known by Yoga, and Yoga itself leads Lo Yoga, He who sticks fast to Yoga always delights in Yoga\**

{]) The first stage of Samprajn&ta Yoga is GrAhyn-Sainlpatti (engrossment in kuowables), the second Grahana-SamfLpfttti (engrossment in instruments of reception) and the third is Grahifr-Sainlpatti (engrossment in the receiver) ; the frontier or last stage is Viveka-Kbyftti or discriminative discernment. The final stage has to be reached after attaining perfection in the previous stages one after another. The frontier cannot be reached all at once. If through grace of God (earned by special devotion to Him) full insight is gained of the last -.tage, insight into lower stages can develop easily.

(2) 'Through the grace of God' and 'through I^varaprayidlilna (special devotion to God)' are the same thing. Through special devotion God's grace is earned, and from that success may come irrespective of Stages. It might he questioned that God being always merciful, how does the point about His special grace arise. In reply it may stated that in Isvaraprapidhftua, God has to be thought of as being present within onc^ own self through which the latent divinity that is in every one, becomes manifest. The full manifestation is Xaivalya or the state of isolation. Thus by attaining this kind of divine perfection the attainment of stages might be irrespective of succession. As in a piece of stone all sorts of images are always present (only waiting to be chiselled out), so in our minds there is an inherent divinity which is like the mind of God. To think of that is to think of God. Although that is within us, in our present state we always think of it ns there being a different person within us. Full manifestation of that idea is (lod's grace.

**trrajf—trrw-«Trtf-wwrfwsf^ tout' uwthitoi tow:** ijwfl smif^aw^wr dfi <sup>n</sup> « <sup>11</sup>