## **3 YOGA PH1LOSOPHV OF PATA^JALI**

**thcrcforej be regarded as pertaining properly to Yoga (7). But the concentration attained by a mind which is onc-pointed (8)t** *i.e.* **occupied with one thought which brings enlightenment about a real entity, weakens the KLesas (9)\* loosens the bonds of Karma (10) as well as leads to the cessation of activities (11) of the mind, is called Samprajhata Yoga (12). Samprajhata Yoga concerns** *(a)* **Vitarka, (5) Vicbara, (r) Atianda and** *{d}* **Asmita. This will be dealt with later. The concentration that is attainable when all the modifications of the mind-stuff arc set at rest is called Asamprajbata.**

(]> Atha—By this word it is implied that by the first Sutra the discourse relating to Yoga is being commenced.

(2) Anusasanam —discourse. The science of Yoga delineated in these Sutras has btun based on the instructions transmitted by Hiranyagarbha and the ancient sages. It is not a science newly ev olved by the framer of the SQtras.

Yoga is not a science based on mere logical reasoning. It was originally taught by seers who experienced the truths enunciated therein, This will be evident from the following consideration. Though the knowledge of such super-senslions subjects as Chit, Asamprajuftta SaniJidki, etc., is now-a-dnys a matter of demonstration to ns, yet for such demonstration to be possible there must be postulated an original proposition (Ffatijua) based on direct experience, Unless, therefore, something is known first hand of such super-sensuous subjects there can not arise any occasion for making any demonstration in respect of them. To **US** the knowledge of such things might come through tradition from generation to generation, but how could such knowledge come to th\*e original teacher who had no instructor ? It must, therefore, be admitted that the original teacher must have acquired that knowjedge through direct realisation. If that were not so, if the science of salvation were attempted to be taught by some one who had not himself been emancipated in his life-time or had not realised the ultimate principle of existence, it would be like one blind man leading another. As a blind man cannot give instructions