## **332 YOGA PH11.050PHY Ol PATAfiiJAl.I**

**configuration is well established inside the cosmic eggr The egg is a minute particle of the Pradhana like a firefly in the sky,** Jn **the nether world, in the seas and** in **the** mountains **live the Asuras, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Kimpumsas, Vaksas Raksasas, Bhutas, Prctas**<sup>3</sup> **Piiachas, Apasmaras, Apsaras, Brahma rfiksnsas, Kusrrtandas, \"inayakas arid such like divine beings, while in the Dvipas live the virtuous Ilevas or heavenly beings and the men\***

**Sumerti is the land of garden of the Tridasa deities ; there arc four gardens called Misravana, Nandana, Chakraratha, and Sumanasa, the Council of the deities called Sudbanna, the city called Sudar^anapura anti the palace called Vaijayanta. The planets, astcrisms and stars\* fastened by the pole-star and restrained by the movement of the wind, are going round the Sumeru at different points above it. In ihe Mahendralolca live si\* classes of deities, viz. Tridasas, Agnisvattas, Yamyas, Tusitas, Aparinirmka-vasavartla, and Farinirmita-vasavartis. They have all their desires fulfilled and are possessed of supernormal powers like reducing one's self, their life-periods extend over Kalpas ; they arc held in reverence, arc fond of pleasures, their bodies arc not formed by parents, and they have families consisting of good-looking and doede Apsaras (nymphs). In the great Prajapatya region there arc five groups of deities—Kumudas, Rbhus, Pratardanas, Anjanabhas, and Prachitabhas. They have mastery over the gross elements, and meditation is their food. They live for a thousand Kalpas (eons). In Brahma's Hist sphere called Janaloka, there arc four classes of Devas—the Brahmapurohitas\* the Brahma-kayikas\* the Rrahma-mahakayikas and the Amaras, They have power over the elements and the sense-organs and have double the longevity of those mentioned before. In the second sphere called Tapoloka,**