<sup>I</sup> he **were published und dhiributcd gratis** by **his disciples** <sup>L</sup> **nobody nmdc his writings a commercial asset. When through the writings of Olhef writers quoting him and his philosophical views. Western scholars came to know of** his **vast erudition.** They started **referring spiritual problems to him for solution. They also made requests tor publication of his Yoga [Soriana in English. This request very much perplexed him us he had retired from such undertakings long before, let alone preparation of a big book like the present one. This book has** been **published in Bengali by the University of Calcutta where ii has been accepted as a standard work ol reference in Indian Philosophy. Eater, an edition of the book in Hindi was published by ihc University of Lucknow for the edification of the scholars of India who do not read Bengali. Luring the last few years of his lire Swann Hjriharunanda Arunya asked several scholars both Indian and non-Indian, to take up the work of rendering bis Bengali Yog^s Dnr.sana into English,, but unfortunately his wish remained unfulfilled when lie shuffled off his mortal coil,**

**<sup>1</sup> was attracted to the monastery at Madhupur when aftei prolonged quest in various pans of India in search of a spiritual guide <sup>l</sup> had conic to** <sup>1</sup>**1lis quiet iinjc place more for rest than for search. By the merest accident <sup>I</sup> heard Of the Philosophy taught at the Kapila Monastery, The revered Acharya Swamiji was then fasting and would not see any visitors, f was told But would I see the younger Swamiji, if [ really wanted to hear anything on a spiritual subject 7 Hie monks of the monastery went very particular and as they did not like to be disturbed for nothing, were I serious in wishing to tjicct the Swamiji?.**

**A.fter a serious heart-searching <sup>I</sup> look courage in both hands and said ''Yes\*'. <sup>I</sup> was informed later that I could see the younger Swamiji the following afternoon. We met, discussed a few general spiritual points and <sup>1</sup> was directed to read a few hooks, published by ihe monastery for Tuller answers to my questions, one of the books, being Ehe Yoga Darsana A few months later Sivami Hariharinanda departed from this life and Swired Dharrnftmcgha Afansa, the younger Swamiji referred to above\* his chief disciple, was installed in his place as the Head of the (Capita Monastery, In course of time, <sup>I</sup> was initiated into the cult of Samkhya-Yoga by the new Chief anti I have never lixiked liaek- After \ears of assiduous study and as an** *aide-memoirey* **<sup>I</sup> compiled a little book in Bengali, primarily for the lx-nefil of my to-disciples. giving the rudiments of the principles and practice of the Samkh> a-Yoga philosophy. While looking into ibis book, my master the said Swami Dharmamegha Aratiya mentioned to me the unfulfilled wish of his preceptor the revered author, the gieat Aeharya-Sw-imiji. as Swami Harihuriinartda was called by all who hud the good fortune to Listen to his**