## **<sup>66</sup>** YOGA PHILOSOPHY OJr PATAAhI

Hvara's case is not like that. The Prakrtilccnas have the possibility of bondage in future but in the case of Isvara there is no such possibility- Isvara is always free and always sovereign. The question, therefore, arises whether this perpetual superiority of livara on account of the excellence oT His self (4) is something of which there is proof or is it something without any proof? The reply is "The Sacred books are its proof\ What is the proof of the genuineness of the scriptures ? Their genuineness is based on supreme wisdom. The Sastras and their sublime wisdom which are present in the mind of the Hvara and His pre-eminence are eternally related to each other (5). For these reasons Lsvara is always jsvara} *i-e.* Omniscient and always liberated.

His pre-eminence is never equalled nor excelled. The commentator explains it by saying that the excellence which is not surpassed by anybody's is the highest excellence and that which is unlimited is Isvara's. That is why the person whose eminence has reached the limit is Isvara.^ There is no pre-eminence equal to His, because if their arc two persons who have equal eminence and if both of them say in respect of the same thing at the same time'let this be new and ^ct this be old\* then the fulfilment of the direction of one will impair the equality of power of the two or if both arc equally powerful, their directions will be inoperative. For that reason (6) the Purusa whose excellence has no equal or is never excelled is Isvara and He is that special Purusa. \*

£L) It should be clearly understood that Isvara is neither tlie Funifa principle by itself nor the Fradhana principle by itself. Isvara is made up of the two\* He is a particular Iieiug and his Godly attributes are based on the ultimate constituent