## 102 **YOGA PHILOSOPHY Of H.VIANJALJ**

*of* Samilpatti. Engrossment in respect of objects are of tlirewind <sup>5</sup> :—

(r) Those relating to worldly things—countless material objects like animals, pots, etc., (it) gross elements, ere. tho\*e relating to the five cardinal elements ami (fir) subtle elements, iff\*. Sound-taninatr\*, Colonr-taumatra, etc- Engrossment or Sam&patti relating to instruments of cognition appertain both to the external and to the internal sense-organs and energies, OF these the external sense-organs are threefold—organs of knowledge, organs of action and the Prawns or vital euetgies-The internal energy, *viz-* the mind is the leader of the external organs. All these are the modified forms of the three principal internal sense-energies which arc Ruddhi (pure 'Ifetling'), Ahaiiikara (Dynamic Ego) and the mind.

Engrossment relating to the coguiser - aforesaid contemplation on the <sup>J</sup> I-feeling\*. Lt has been said before, that in S&vijH-Sam&dhi or concentration on an object when it relates to the cogniser\* that coguiser is not the Purii\$a principle but is the Empiric Self. That Ruddhi is identified with the Self. That is why it is the assumed or empirical seer. Until the mind and the **sense-organs** completely cease to function, the state of resting in Futuna cannot he attained. Therefore as long as the mind continues to be affected by its modification so long would the impure seer be the assumed seer. *flI* am the cogniser of knowledge"—this feeling is its true character. When cognition ceases completely. the knower of this quiescent state who remains in his own self is the Furuja or real ster.

Bcsides these, the Uvara-Sdinlpatti or engrossment in God, engrossment in a liberated soul, etc. which might be possible, come within the engrossment relating to the coguiser, instrument of cognition and object cognised. The image of Clod, mind or 4I-fceJing+, etc, which is adopted as the object foj contemplation for purposes of engrossment will fall within the appropriate category enumerated above.