## **2B YOCi <sup>A</sup> PHILOSOPHY OF PATA.SjALI**

included in the *\*V.* That is why in the perception of the pot, the transmutation of the 'Me-feeling in the shape of knowledge of the pot and the sett arc undifferentiated. Of course, by reflection and reasoning we can understand the difference between the seer and the pot, but that is not possible in a mental fluctuation like the unreflective perception relating to the pot.

'The Self's awareness1 means the manifestation of the knowledge of which the Puru^a or the knowtr is the witness. It may be urged that if the Purusa is the illuminator of various modifications then he must have variety or lie must be subject to change\* That is not so- If the variation had been in the Pnnisa then that objection would have been valid\* But the variations are in the senses, **Or** in the mind\* If objects are analysed, we shall get only subtle activity which is really rising and disappearing every moment. Under tlieir influence the 'I-feeling\* is also being momentarily changed in a subtle manner\* Furupa is the illuminer of the momentary phases of the mutation of the \*I-feeliugT. When that mutation ceases, what remains is the Furu\$& ; while when that mutation becomes manifest it is Hnddhi. That is why that mutation cannot reach the Furusa. This is really how a Yqgin realises the principles of Puru\$a. First, he realises the Tnmu&tra, *e\*g-* the light TamnStra, taste Tantmltra out of the various gross elements! i.r, the variety *ia* colours or in tastes etc. Then gradually by deep meditation he realises the disappearance of those principles in the \*I\*sense\ By realising that the subtle principles of the TanmAtra is nothing but a variation of the *\** I-sense\*, he arrives at the pure 'l-feeling' and then with discriminative discernment he realises the Furu\$a principle. Thus by gradually shutting out the subtle and subtler mutations he is established in that principle, trf. gels a clear idea of that principle.

(5) £iThe Self is the reflector of Buddhi", this description is of a deep import- As reflection Commonly mdaus going in a different direction on striking a surface like that of a mirror, so \* reflection\* here means giving rise to action or feeling by striking against another substance, or appearing as acting or feeling. As in the case of light, the mirror is the reflector, so in respect