## 25S **YOGA PHri-OSOFHY Ol- PATAftjAlLI**

**other two (i.r. external and internal operations) are absent\* This i\$ effected by one effort, Just as water dropped on a piece of hot stone shrinks simultaneously on all sides, even so (in the third, or suspension), the other two operations simultaneously disappear. These three operations, again, are practised by noticing (i) space, that is so much space is its scope\* (ii) time\* observed according to time, that is, regulated according to the calculation of moments (Ksanas)? and (iii) number, observed according to number,** *e.g***\* so many ingoing and outgoing breaths constitute the first stroke, so many numbers constitute the second stroke etc., in the same way, the third stroke\* Again, they are mild, intermediate and acute. This is Prapayama observed according to number. Prartayama becomes long and subtle after one gets habituated to it in this way\***

(1) Tile words <sup>1</sup> Rechaka+ (expulsion of air), 'PGrakn' (drawing in of air) and 'Kumbhaka' (suspension of air) were not used in ancient times in their modern sense\* If#tlicy had been in use in those days the author of the Sutras would certainly have used them. They are later inventions\*

Kxternal operations ( Vfihya V^lti ), internal operation (Abhynntsra Vftti) and suspension (Starubka Vytti)— these three are not the same as expulsion of air (Rcchaku), drawing in of breath (Puraka) and suspension of breathing (Kumbhaka)\* The author of the Blia^ya has described external operation as want of movement after exhalation. This is not the same as expulsion of air (Rechakaj\* Rechaka is a Form of exhalation\* In fact, later commentators only tried to reconcile the newer forms with the practices mentioned in this commentary. But none succeeded in reconciling them\*

Interpreting the word 'Gatyablilva\* (suspension of movement) as 'suspension of natural movement1, some sort of affinity between 'Rectanka-FQraka\* and external operation etc. may be established. After exhalation, keeping the air outside and not drawing in breath immediately, is an external operation ;