## **73 YOGA PHILOSOPHY Of PATAS<JALl**

**being, so is the Purusa (2) who is the reflector of the Buddhi of the devotee. This is how the individual Self is realised,**

(I) The word 'Pratyalc\* is used an different senses. What is underlying everything, that is Isvara\* is Prntyuk. The word also means ancient ; therefore\* ancient being Lsvara, is Frntvak. In the present case the meaning is different. Here Pratyak means fcnower of the opposite object, Vftchaspati Miira explains the word as 'Knowtr of non-self as opposed to self1. That Sort of consciousness is Pratyak-Chetana, or Puru^a, The word Turtifa' when used by itself might refer to a free being\* an unliberated person, Isvara etc. But Pratyak-Cbetatm means the true self of a person who has nescience (and thus of one who is free from nescience also). This should be Carefully noted. The consciousness which is opposed to objects\* i'.r. knowahles, and is directed towards one's self is Pratynk-Chetaua, Every Purusa with the adjunct of Buddhi or the enjoyer\* observer\* knower is Fratynk-Chetana\* One's own soul is Pratynk-Chetann or Own Self-

(2j This has been gone into fully in note (1) of Sutra 1-2&. Isvara by Himself is consciousness only. So mind cannot stay in it as it is not comprehensible ns a perceivable object. Awareness is knowing itself and it is not possible to take it objectively, as something outside of ns. What is outside of self is knowable. If Absolute Awareness is taken as such, then it would uo longer be Awareness in iLself, it would be a thing occupying space andmade up of light, sound\* etc. In reality when thinking of Ciod in the names described before we come ultimately to our own consciousness, and that is seeing CVod in the self, "Realising the soul in the self" is practically the same. The significance of these expressions becomes cleat by contemplating that Isvara is free from all nescience\* established in Himself and in His own self. To understand a thing which is self-conscious is to be like thfct thing\* This is how Isvara Frumdhrma brings knowledge of ones own self.

The composer of the Sfitra has shown how Pranidh3.ua of *m.* Nirgu^a eternally liberated Isvara can bring about salvation, as that is the principal item in the practice of Karma Yoga,