**When success in Yogkl concern ration is jiuiincdh knowledge :md will-power reach iheir fullness. One who has noi got such proficiency cannot be regarded as having ai Earned highest jxrrfection in Samadht. I[ might** *\x* **thought that a person having attained such perfection may not like to display his enlightenment or will-power. That may be true, bui those who while trying to apply (heir knowledge and will power fere unsuccessful and still claim to be proficient in Samadhi must be labouring under a delusion.**

**The fruits of Yoga are the Cessation of the three-fold misery. When one can control ilie cognitive faculty fully and rise at will above the perception of externals and attachment to the body and the senses, then only can one rise above all afflictions.**

**Real Yoga is of two kinds. Samprajfi&tfe and Asamprajnaia, For SampraJnAta Yoga one-pointedness or intentness of mind with close and undivided attention is essential. When by contemplation on divinity or on Self etc, or on a stale of blissfulness, the mind can be held fixed without elTon on any particular object, and no other idea intrudes itself on the mind, then the mind can be regarded as having reached a state of liELbitual one-pointedness.** *In* **an unsteady stage [he mind can often he fixed occasionally but oftenor would it work without control, llierefore. even though temporary Samudhi might be at [finable at that Mage. ■! will not secure perpetual peace of mind for which a slate of habitual one-pointedness is essential. If Samadhi is aiiaincd in such a onC'pointed state of the mind and enlightenment comes in that state, then the insight gained will always remain. This process is known as -Sumapaui <engrossment). If after gaining the power of acquiring knowledge in this way. one can realise the highesi form of empirical self which is the Cogniser. and retain that enlightenment, then one can reach the highest stage of comprehension in the phenomenal world. Subsequently, if with discriminating knowledge, realising (lie phenomenal character of the empirical self, one can. by supreme renunciation, shut out even that engrossment\* that would be Asamprajhata Yoga. Then only can one uttaiii complete quiescence of ihe mind and ihe senses, f.e. complete cessation of physical and psychical activity, when only the solitary existence of the FJurusa or the Motcmpiric Self remains. Thai is the ultimate goal of Yoga, wrhich is perpetual peaoe of mind or Kaivaiya Moksa\* i.c. Salvation by isolation.**

**There can be three states of the mind. viz. SfiLtvikfe or Luminously calm. Rajasika or restless and TilniEisika or stupefied. Therefore, if there be reduction of Rajas or the principle of unrcstT it dLx's not necessarily follow that the mind will he Sattvika : it might be Tamasaka. What i\* commonly called 'Trance' is a slate of mental inactivity of**

CENTRAL LIBRARY