## **SUPERNORMAL POWERS <sup>331</sup>**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

and the golden king or mountains called Sumeru in the middle, Its peaks on the **faur sides** arc of silver, emerald, crystal **and** gold (2), On account oT the sheen of the **emerald, the** southern region of the sky looks like **the** leaf of a blue **lotus ; Lhe** eastern is white, **the** western **bright** and **the** northern yellow. On the right side is the Jambu (tree) **whence** it is called **the** Jambu Dvlpa. Its night and day go round with the motion of the sun, where the days and nights seem to be in contact. Fhis has three northern mountain chains called Neela, Sveta, and SrAgavat covering an extent of nearly two thousand Yojanas. Surrounded by these mountains are **three** continents ol **nine** thousand Yojanas each\* They are known as Ramanaka, Hiranmaya and Uttarakuru. To the south are the three mountain chains called Nisadha, Hcmakuta and Himasaila extending over two thousand Yojanas each, in the midst of which are situated lhe three continents &F Harivarsa, Kimpurusavarsa and Bharatvarsa each extending over nine thousand Yojanas. (1 Yujana = about 9 miles)\*

To the east of Sumeril is Bhadrasva up to Malyayat mountain **and** to the west is Ketumala tip to tiandhamadana mountain. In their midst is Ilavrtavarsa. The diameter ofJambudvTpa is a hundred thousand Yojanas and stretches round Sumeru for fifty thousand Yojanas\* These arc surrounded by double their extent oi salt water ocean. After them arc the OvJpas called Saka, Kusa, K.rauheha, Sfilmala, Magadha and Puskara each twice the size of the one mentioned just before **it\*** with beautiful **mountains** and surrounded by oceans, and spreading like a pile of mustard seeds. The seven oceans, except the first one ofsalt **water,** taste as sugarcane juice, wine, butter, curd, cream and milk (3). These are encompassed by seven seas, girdle shaped and encircled by Lokaloku mountains, and are estimated to be five hundred millions of Yojanas. This