*Reply*: Since they have already begun producing results, like an arrow that has been shot: As an arrow, freed earlier from a bow for hitting a target, even after piercing through the target comes to a stop only after falling down as a result of the dissipation of its initial momentum, similarly, actions that produced the (present) body verily continue, even after fulfilling the purpose of maintaining the body, to exist as before until the dissipation of their inherent tendencies. But, as that very arrow, when it has not acquired the momentum needed for action, when it has not been shot even though fixed on the bow, can be withdrawn, similarly, actions which have not begun yielding their results may be rendered unproductive by Knowledge, even while existing in their receptacle. [\(120\)](#page--1-0) Hence, it is established that, it has been reasonable to state that on the fall of the present body of an enlightened person, 'He is not born again.'

Here are being presented these meditation etc. which are the alternative means for the realization of the Self:

## यानने ामिन पयित के िचदामानमामना। अये सयेन योगेन कमयोगेन चापरे॥२४॥

24. Through meditation some realize the Self in (their) intellect with the help of the internal organ; others through Sānkhya-Yog, and others through Karma-Yog.

*Dhyānena*, through meditation: Meditation means contemplation (on the Self) after withdrawing into the mind with concentration the organs of hearing etc. from the objects like sound etc., and then withdrawing the mind into the indwelling conscious Self. Thus, from the citation of such illustrations as, 'the crane meditates, as it were', 'the earth meditates, as it were', 'the mountains meditate, as it were' (Ch. 7.6.1), it follows that meditation is a constant and uninterrupted current of thought like a line of pouring oil. Through that meditation, *kecit*, some yogīs; *paśyanti*, realize; the indwelling conscious *ātmānam*, Self; *ātmani*, in (their) intellect; *ātmanā*, with the help of the internal organ that has been purified by meditation.