## **ON! CONCENTRATION <sup>I</sup>** *b*

CENTRAL LIBRARY

service to it3 owner and thus becomes, as it were, the very self of the owner, so does the mind serve its master, the Puruga, by drawing to itself the objects round it and presenting them to Pimistt atid thereby become, as it were, the very self of the Purina.

(4) \*1 shall see', '1 shall hear', *\*1* know' 'I doubt', etc\* amongst all these Vfttis the common feature is T. The basic knower behind all these phases of T is Consciousness itself which is the Seer—the Dra^tj-, The Seer is Consciousness\* The mind reveals tilings by appearing to be conscious under the influence of the Consciousness that is the Seer\* That which is manifested or that which we come to know is the object. Colours, sounds, etc. arc external objects. Knowledge relating to them is acquired through the mind\* In the knowledge of object, T am the knower or the subject, mind with the senses is the instrument or power of knowing, and the things known are the object. Generally, matters relating to our mind are known to us by introspection. Therefore, when the process of knowledge takes place in the mind before we come to analyse it, we first become aware of it iu introspection and then, again in\* recollection. Though the mind acts as an instrument of the Seer in the matter of acquisition of knowledge, yet on certain occasions it itself becomes an object of knowledge to the Seer\* The constituent cause of the mind is Asmita or the feeling of *\*<sup>1</sup>\* The cognitions of objects appearing in the mind arc the varying modifications of the T-feelitig\* When the power is acquired of keeping the mind calm, then we can have an intuition of this Asmtlfl- If we concentrate on the changing 'I'-feeling we can realise that the knowledge of anything by the mind is a change of this Asm its, and is different from it\* Then the mind perceiving the objects becomes the object and **Ahaqikrira** or the pure Tfeeliug becomes the instrument of knowledge, Then when by controlling the T-feeling we can remain on the pure Asmitalevel, we can realise that the AhamkSra is different from the Self and is to be eliminated. Duly pure T-feeling or individual intelligence then becomes an instrument of knowledge. When through knowledge acquired in concentration it is realised that individual intelligence is also mutable and not