## 4J9 **VOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATASjALI**

**states of concentration have, however, an object** concentra**ted upon (9).**

(1) The description of Sawpraju&ta concentration given in the commentaries on the first Stitra should be recalled in this connection. The successful concentration attained in the habitually one-pointed state of the mind which brings knowledge cutting at the root of all miseries is called Samprajfiata-Yoga. Those Sam&dhis or concentrations which bring forth such realisable knowledge have four distinct divisions\* The subject of contemplation marks their differences, while the classification of the knowledge derived therefrom\* Savitarka and Nirvilafka or Savicham and Nirvichilra, is based both on the subject contemplated upon and on the nature of the contemplation^ (see Sutra I. 41-44).

[2) If the modification of the mind arising out of words, (being the name of an object), the object itself( its knowledge and the verbal delusion due to mingling of them relates to any gross matter\* then it is called Vitarkiinvayee or depending on Vitarka, The things which we see around us like cow, pot, blue\* yellow etc. which are taken in °'ir sense-organs\* are gross objects. Speaking from the point of view of principles, when sound, colour etc. taken in by the senses are mingled and presented to our mind as out object, that shows its grossness. For example\* a cow ; it is a conglomeration of several features perceptible by our senses which are comprehended as one whole. When such gross matter becomes the subject of concentration and knowledge is derived thereby, then that is called Savitarka-Sainiklhi\* while when there is no such Vitarka\* it is called NirviUrka-Samadhh Roth arc **Samprajftata-**Satnadhi relating to Vitarka.

<3) When concentration relating to gross objects is mastered, full insight is obtained of subtle principles by a special process of mental analysis with the . help of the knowledge gained during the state of concentration. This is Savichlra-Samprajii ata \*Analytic thinking cannot be conducted without the help of words ; that is why this Savich&ra-S\*itiadbi is also characterised by the vagueness due to mingling of words (name of the object), the object itself