## 10 **voga philosophy of pataSjali**

*only* by learning;/1 In the ^Astras it is stated that the knowledge of self attained through concentration is the highest virtue. Happiness is the result of virtue ; knowledge of self or the state of liberation brings about peace in the shape of cessation of misery which is the highest form of welfare. In this world, whoever is aiming at Mok^a in whichever form it may be, is following that path in some way or other. The worship of God brings about calmness of mind ; charity and self-restraint also lead indirectly to calmness. Therefore, all devotees the world over, consciously or unconsciously are practising in some form or other, the universal virtue of suppressing the fluctuations of the mind.

(2) Detailed in forination regarding the three faculties of PrakA^a, Kriy£ and Sthiti is given in the gloss on Sutra II—18 {Sutra IS of Book LI). The commentator is here describing the several traits which become dominant in the several states of mind and the things that are liked by the mind in such .states.

(3-4) The Sattva Guya which has been transformed into the Chitta, is the 'Chitta-Sattva' or the pure mind. When this mind is influenced by Rajas and Tanias, i.e\* when on account of restlessness or obstruction the mind is not inclined to contemplate on **Lhe** pure self, then it becomes addicted to love *-of* power or to objects of the senses. That sort of disturbed mind never feels happy in meditating on the Self **(Atmft)** or in being detached from the objects of the -senses ; rather they feel happy in the abundant fulfilment of their desires and enjoyment of the objects of the senses\* If such persons are religious devotees they hanker after supernormal powers ; if not, they aspire after the acquisition of earthly possessions. These persons take delight in religious as well as worldly discourses. Gradually as the Sattva Gima develops iti them and the other two Gnuas are overcome, they lose their interest in worldly objects and become happy by withdrawing into themselves. Men with restless minds do not Want real peace but only an increase of power.

**Men with minds overcome by the principle of Tanias become inert and they generally engage themselves in vicious acts or acts which cause great unhappiness. They become**