## <sup>72</sup> YOCrA PHILOSOPHY 01L PATAfsIJALI

**indicated by the language f<this is that person's father, that is this person's son". In other creations too convention dependent on the relationship between the denoting words and the object denoted has been in use (1). Sages, who know the Sastras, say that on** account **of similarity** of **usage, the relationship between a word and the object indicated by it is eternal (2).**

(1) There arc many things whose uaiue *is* indicated by a syllable or a word, btil absence of such a name does not inteifere with knowing the thing *{i.e.* pereeivables). There are other things again which arc only understood by the thought raised by the expressed word- Those names are also conventional but the significance of those words is the setting-up of a current of thought. The example of the first kind is Chaitra, Maitra (names of perceivable persons), etc. Even if those names are not there, there would be no difficulty in knowing them. The example of the second kind of words is ^Father\*, 'Son', etc. The word 'Father' indicates a person of whom a sou is born. "Maitra is Ckaitra+s Father", in this phrase the name ^Chaitra' will indicate only the existence of a person known as Chaitra. Looking at Chaitra without knowing his name will also bring similar knowledge\* If Chaitra has been seen before, mention of the name will bring tip the recollection of Chaitra. Even if the name is forgotten\* he can be remembered and kept in mind. But the relationship between Chaitra and Maitra\* t.j\* what is meant by the word 'Father-, cannot be thought of without the use of the symbolic word, i,f. language. The meaning of the word 'Father' is the result of a thinking process\* As the presence of a lamp indicates illumination, so the utterance of the word 'Father' indicates the relationship. Unless there is a thougiit-process or a symbol thereof, the full significance is not understood\*

livara is also the product of a similar Thought-process\* Unless certain faculties implied by words are thought of, no conception can be had of lAvara. The thought-process associated with livara has been symbolised by the word OM. Although words and their meanings are invariably related, the same