## **4 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATaSjaLI**

with the senses is unfit to think of subtle principles is called a stupefied mind. People engrossed in thoughts of family or wealth generally concentrate on them. 'That is an example of concentration of an infatuated mind.

The third is the restless (Vik^ipta) mind. This is different from the distraught mind. Most of the spiritual devotees have this class of mind. A mind which can be calm sometimes and disturbed at other times is regarded as a restless mind. When temporarily calm, a restless mind can understand the real nature of subtle principles when it hears of them and can contemplate on them for a time. On account of difference in intelligence and other traits of character, there are innumerable varieties amongst men of the restless mind. There can be concentration even with a restless mind but such concentration does not last long\* because the basic trait of Such a mind is calmness at times and restlessness at other times.

The fourth is tile ouc-pointed (Ekagra) mind. The mind which is pointed to one direction only, iV. holds on to one thing only, is called a one\*pointed mind. Pataujali lias defined it later as a mind wherein\* on the fading away of one thought\* the same thought arises again in succession In other words\* when one thought vanishes from the mind and the next that arises is the same as the other and when a continuous succession of such states continues\* then the mind is called one-pointed. When it becomes a habit of the mind, fj. when the mind is occupied wholly with the same thought which continues even in dream\* then the state of the mind can be really called one-pointed- When one-pointedness is mastered, it leads to SamprajfiJlta Samadhi. That Sam3d hi or concentration is real Yogie Samadhi leading to salvation. In the Vedas it is stated that even if a sinful thought comes unconsciously or irresistibly into the mind of such a - wise person it cannot overpower him who has reached the Samprajfi&ta state.

The fifth is called the suppressed (Niruddha) state. This is the last state of the mind. When througff practice, nil thoughts can be shut out from the mind for a long time, the mind can be regarded as having reached a closed state. When by this process the mind-stuff gradually censes to function\* then only is liberation secured.