inseparable. 1'hosc who attained realisation of ihc Self by ihc conic rr ifla lion of ihc efficient and constimeni principles of phenomena and practised LonipJcic renunciation of worldly life, wcec regarded as belonging to the Sarhkhya sect, while those who attained ihc goal by practising austerity, churning of Mantras with intensive study of the Sastras and unstinted dependence on Clod were regarded as belonging to the Yoga seel. In the philosophy Of salvation, the Samkhya can in rcaliiy be regarded as the chapter dealing with principles while Yoga can be regarded as the chapter dealing with practice.

Jn ancient India\* Hiranyagarbha or the tir%i created One was believed to be the first exponent of the Yoga Philosophy. He is supposed to have communicated that knowledge to some who propagated lhal knowledge to the world. On the other hand, some imagine dial the name Hiranyagarbha might have referred to Ksj Kapila who was also known and worshipped in ancient India as Praj&pati. There arc however two schools of thought as far as Kapila's prc-cmincnec in this philosophy is concerned. Some\* specially those of the Samkhya seel, hold that Kupila came into this world with knowledge acquired in a previous birth\* and equipped with the impression of (hat pre-natal knowledge **Lind** endowed <sup>w</sup> hh consequent intuition and spirii of I'OttUrlciiilion he. through his genius, attained the highest spiritual position and spread the knowledge in this world. Others, viz. those belonging to the Yoga sect, hold that Kapila got his knowledge through the grace of God (Hirjriyagarbha or Saguna Isvara) and communicated it to others. This view is contained in Svciasvatafa Upanigad which was one of the scriptures of die ancient Yoga sect.

To sum up. it would appear that before the advent of Kapilp there was prevalent a knowledge of the Self with attributes as well as the Yoga connected therewith. Kapilu introduced ihc knowledge of the atlributelcss Self and the Yoga for the attainment of salvation on that line of Ihought. Whether through the force of his own genius or through grace of God, it was Kapila who propounded the Sariikhya-Yoga philosophy as we see i| today.

Yoga Sutra is ihe oldest of the six Indian philosophies There is no reference therein to the views expressed in any other philosophy nor has ariy attempt been made therein to refute the arguments of others. The Sutras contain only logical arguments for estaWisliing the propositions enunciated therein. It tan therefore he assumed that the Yoga Sutras were promulgated before the advent of Buddhism or any other religion or philosophy. The RhU^a pf the Yoga Suiras though older than the commentaries of oilier philosophies, appears however to have been promulgated after the spread of the Buddhist doctrines. The Bha?ya