## **94 YGC.A PHILOSOPHY OF PATASjALI**

bin subjective <sup>i</sup> that is why only thinking oT the light of the sky docs not bring about the couttmplation of BuddhisattYa. Iti thinking of it subjectively, a hazy objective idea has to be formed first. Commonly, the effulgence iti the heart remains objectively present in the contemplation of the pure 'I-feeling'. Until the iniad gets fully fixed on it subjectively, it goes on moving between the light anti the 'I-feeling\ This effulgence is therefore called the imaginary representation of the 'I-feeJmg\ Tlie Upanifjad says that its size is that of a thumb (i,\*. minute) jtnd its appearance is like that of the sun. In the \$vetitsvatara-Upanisad we have ""Brahma reveals himself in Yoga to one who first contemplates on an effulgence like that of the mist, stnoktr, sun, air, fire, fire-tiy, lightning, crystal or moon,"

Like contemplation of light\* contemplation on ideas of touch, taste\* etc- might also be suggestive in the contemplation of 'J-feeling'\* **In** such ei case the pleasant feeling of touch, etc. in the core of the heart might be adopted for leading on to the T who is the knower of that pleasant feeling- That **contemplation** can be conducted **m** the following manner **:**

First imagine in yonr heart a limitless, skylike or transparent effulgence *;* then think that the setf is within that, *i.t.* T am spread all over it. **Such** thought bring\*, ineffable bliss. The transparent, radiant 11-feeling\* radiating from the heart to infinity is called Visokft Jyotismall or sorrowless effulgent light. It is not the pure T but only a modification thereof. The pure \*1' is only a receiver, but this sort of '1-feeliug' is not the complete receiver. By it subtle things **are revealed.** YoginS **place** this light of the heart on the tiding of w+hich they want to have knowledge. **Therefore** in this kind of meditation, pure reception is not the principal thing but the particular object received. In the highest sorrowdess perception relating to pure Tp the principal tiling is the receiver ; it is the engrossment in the T-pri uciple. When the method of objective contemplation relating to T is mastered, the contemplation on the pure ■1' to the exclusion of the objects in which *\*V* had been supposed to be present has to be practised which wrill bring about a realisation of the pure T. In this way the idea of space is eliminated and only the idea of knower of space—the port-T—remains\* *i-c.* the Slttvika faculty of sentience in <sup>a</sup> current