## **YOGA PHJUOSOFHY Oi I'ATARjAI-T**

ultimate knower, is neither Bnddhi nor the senses but the Putu\$<sup>a</sup> which is bi-yond them. Hence Bnddhi serves the purpose of, or is the object of, another, while Puru^a exists for his ownsel fT i.#. He is the enjoyer. This point will lu- furthet discussed in the fourth putt of the boot.

C4) The third argument on this subject is that Buddbi is in itself unconscious while Purina is pure consciousness or consciousness itself. Btiddhi is mutative. What mutates has activity, i\<- manifestation and non-manifestation, and so is composed of three Gin^as. The three Gimss are the ingredients of all objects, and object is synonymous with insentience. Thus Buddlii has the three Gtmas and is insentient. Puru^a is the Seer beyond the three Gliuas, therefore, conscious. There is no other thing beyond the Seer and the seen, the conscious and the unconscious. Therefore that which is not the 'seen1 or knowable, is conscious and that which is uot the seer is unconscious. As it lias the property of manifesting (by the reflection of Ihirusa) and of having assured cognition, Buddlii is composed of the Gubins, because manifestation is l Improperly of Saltvs and where there is Sattva, there are also Rajas and Tanias. As it lias the three Gujpfls as its stuff, Bnddhi is unconscious. \*

(5) PurufH is not similar to Buddhj—this is established\* Moreover it is not altogether distinct from Bnddhi, because though pure, i.r. beyond Bnddhi, it oversees the cognition or modifications of Buddbi. The overseeing of the modifications of Buddlii is called knowledge ofself and nonself- The imitating part or ingredient of knowledge and its cause iu the shape of overseeing by the iJuru\$a, appear as identical iu the process of knowledge. The flow of knowledge is going on always, that is why the misconception of regarding Plirn^a and cognitive Bnddhi as identical, is always going on.

The question might then arise : 'Who perceives tlie identification of Buddlii and Puru^a\* ? The reply is "By the '1'-sense —the Kgo or knower." By what modification u> it cognised ? \*By misapprehension and by memory of latent impressions of that.' Iti other words, nil ordinary knowledge is erroneous. When there is the erroneous idea of the identity of Btiddhi and Burusa, then is formed the idea of 'J know'. Tims the