## **ON CONCENTRATION** *2\*

CENTRAL LIBRARY

And memory as well as by the fact that the stoppage of such fluctuations will bring about a stoppage of the ivakitlg state and dream state, they have been included automatically. Similarly, fresolution\* has not been specifically mentioned because it arises through modifications of cognition and stops with the shutting out of such modifications. By the five falst: cognitions, *i*resolution' has also been implied, as resolutions are formed through attachment, hatred, aversion, etc\* In reality the maker of the Sutra has mentioned only the fundamental controllable modifications. That is why the feelings or states of fluctuation like happiness or misery have not been included. Happiness or sorrow cannot be controlled by itself ; it is to be **eliminated** by shutting out valid cognition etc. which give rise to them.

In the Yoga philosophy the word *Vitti* has been used technically to imply cognition or conscious mental states. Of them, Pramftna is correct knowledge, Viparyaya is incorrect cognition, Vikalpa is the cognition of a thing which does not e\*ist and which is other than Framb^a and Viparyaya *\* >:idril or dreamless sleep is indistinct awareness of the state of suppression ; anti Sm^ti or memory is the awareness again of previous cognitions. As the fluctuations of the mind relating to inclination or disinclination are preceded by cognition and cognition prevails over all oilier fluctuations, the stoppage of the cognitioual modifications serves to shut out the working of tlie mind. That is why the fluctuations to be controlled in Yoga are the fluctuations of the cognitive state. Yogis become successful in shutting out the fluctuations of the mind by controlling tlie fluctuations of cognition. The teal scientific method of controlling the mind is to proceed by controlling the coguitiotial fluctuations. The Vrtus iu Yoga mean the variations of PrakhyA or the Sattva dement of the mind\* Chitta or the mind is the internal power which cognises, wills and retains by blending together the knowledge relating to sound, touch, light, taste and smell brought in by the five sense-organs, the feeling relating to movement of objects brought in by the organs of action, the perception *<sup>q</sup>{* iffertness of outside elements by the five Pranas or tlie **organic** energies and the perception of pleasure and pain **as**