## **ON PRACTICE 193**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

indicate the diversities of the notes of the scale of octaves of sound ; heat\* cold etc\* (touch) ; blue, yellow etc. (light) : sweet, sour etc\* (taste) *\* good and bad smell etc\* (smell). Each of the BhGtas has such diversities\* TaumMras **have** no such varieties. Secondly\* the three states of quietness, excitement and stupor are diversities the varieties of sound etc., and the varieties like quietness etc. go together. Unless there is a **knowledge** i.f. appreciation of the diversities such as in **the** scale of sound, heat and cold etc. worldly happiness, misery or infatuation cannot arise. Thirdly, the Bhtttas being the final (lowest form of) mutations (i.r. not being the cause of further modifications) are called Viscous. Thus the characteristics of the Bhutas can be summarised as follows i—That which is endowed with the property of various sounds and causes pleasure, misery and stupor\* is **Ak&ia** ; that which is endowed **with** the property of various kinds of touch and causes pleasure etc. is Viyu ; similarly of Tejas etc\* These are the five ktuds of Bhutas or objective Vi£e\$as.

The Visesas known as senses are generally counted as eleven. They arc of two kinds external and internal. The external senses deal jvilh external objects *•,* Mind, the internal sense, deals with objects like sound, sensations etc. presented to it by the external senses, the feelings caused by internal Causes, happiness and effort.

The external organs of sense are generally divided into two classes\* *friz,* the sense-organs, and the organs of action. Pranas Of vital organs being included in them arc not counted separately but they arc also external organs. The sense-organs are Sattvika in character, organs of action are Rfljasika and prinas Tdmasika. Each of them 1ms five members. Thus there are five sense-organs, c.j?. the ear, the recipient ot sound ; skin, receiver of the sense of touch in the form ot heat or cold ; eye takes in colour ; tongue takes in taste and the nose take^ in smell. The organs of action ate tongnerelating to spoken words ; the hands relating to art anti craft : the legs reliiting to locomotion ; anus relating to excretion : and the reproductive organs relating to reproduction. Prana, Udilna. VylUfl, Ap&na and Sam^Lua are the five Prftpas or vital energies. The function of Pr&pa is to sustain the organs of perception

O.F. 132—25