## ON COMlEMRAtrON **33**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

## **Dreamless Sleep Is The Mental Modification Produced By Condition Of Inertia In The State Of Absence ( Of Waking And Dreaming ). 10.**

As we can remember when we wake up that we had been sleeping, sleep is called a mental modification, as indicated in lbe feelings, expressed by phrases such as "I slept well, <sup>I</sup> am feeling cheerful, it has cleaved my brain"' or slept poorly", "On account of disturbed sleep, my mind has become inactive, and is wandering unsteadily"', or "I was in deep sleep as if in <sup>a</sup> stupor\* my limbs arc heavy, my brain is tired and languid\* as if it has been stolen by somebody else and lying dormant''\* If during sleep there was no cognition of the inertslate, then on waking, one would not have remembered that feeling. There would not also have been recollection of the state in which the mind was in sleep. That is why sleep is regarded as a particular kind of reeling, and should be shut out like other cognitions when concentration is practised. (1).

(!) In the waking state, the souse-organs, the organs or action and the seat of thinking (a particular part of the brain) all work actively\* In the dream state the **flense**-organs Antl the organs of action become inactive\* only the seat of thinking goes on acting\* Hut in dreamless sleep all the three become inactive. The feeling of insensibility that come\* on the botly immediately before sleep, is inertia or Tanias\* In nightmare sometimes the sense-organs become active but the organs of action remain inactive\* One can partly hear and set but canuot move one's limbs\* That frozen feeling is Tamos referred to above\* That mental modification is sleep which is subject to thitf Tanias. Because activity is stopped in sleep under the influence of inertia caused by Tarnas, it is a sort of **calmness** but it is exactly opposite to the calmness of concentration. State of sleep is neither voluntary nor transparent calmness while concentration is both. Sleep is like