## **2CH VOCA PHILOSOPHY OF FATA^JALt**

Viyaya tneaus 'of which Purina is the object1. Buddhi of which Purnga is the object or receiver always appears like the kuower, while Buddhi of which the object? are sound etc\* sometimes appears as knoivu and sometimes as unknown. As Puruja makes Buddhi its object or exhibits it, so Buddhi also makes Purusa its object, *i.e.* knows ils basic exhibitor as 'I am the secrT. Thus the expression 'FilmSit is the object of Buddhi' and Buddhi is the object of Puru\$a'mean almost the same\*

In brief, the objects of Buddhi, i.r, sounds etc. which arc shown by Buddhi, being known at one time and not known at another, knowledge of sound at one time becomes a different knowledge, at another, this indicates the mutability of Buddhi. On the other hand, the Buddhi of which Purina is ilie object, i.t\* which shows the Puru?a (the conception 'I know myself\*) never becomes (I do not know myself'\* As long as there is Buddhi it will be \*1 know myself1. Buddhi indicating JI do not know myself\* is an unreal, unimaginable thing. Therefore, the exhibition of Fum\$a is ever **manifest** and it is never unmanifest or unknown. <sup>1</sup> hus He is an immutable manifestation or unconditioned Awareness. W hen Buddhi is not there or is hid, it wjjl not be manifested. That also is a mutation of Buddhi. That will not affect the iUumincr in the least, linddhi by its intrinsic **power** of activity is shown to the illuminer. When that is not done, nothing happens to the illuminer, only the Buddhi remains umuanifest.

Buddhi coloured by objects assumes different forms after the objects, while that relating to Purusa becomes like T know myself' but never *\* do not know myself\*. That is why the real kuower indicated by it is immutable\* 'l am the kuower this idea is Buddhi relating to Piirupa- If it *vo\ih\* he shown or even imagined that this form of Buddhi is ever 'not known then Purus\* would have been known and unknown, i.\*. mutable.

The idea T is directly receptive, while '1 was1 or 'l shall be1 is reflective. Memory, wish etc, are reflective. Reflection cannot take place without a reflector. That which in the shape of consciousness produces cognisance is the reflector. So cognition is imaginable without such a reflector, because every cognition is a reflected one. Therefore, any cognition Linperceivcd by the Buddhi, whose object is its reflector, the