## **13\* YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATASjALJ**

true and the false is the opposition of VidyA and Avidya, of correct knowledge and incorrect knowledge. That does not however prove the contrariness of the object ; i.f.f the snake and the rope are different but yot opposed to one another. The cause of this erroneous knowledge, or the modification due to avidyA, is latency of such knowledge. Therefore the common name for false cognition and the corresponding latencies, is Avidyft. AvidyA as false cognition is without any beginning\* So also is VidyA beginningles\* <sup>t</sup> because as living beings have wrong conception so have they got correct conception. In ordinary circumstances, there is it preponderance of wrong cognition and deficiency of right cognition, while iu discriminative discernment there is complete preponderance of right cognition and extreme dificiency of wrong cognition. There is no separate thing called Avidyfl over and above the modification of the mind. Avidyfl is only a form (unreal) of modification of the mind. Thus when it is said AvidyA is eternal, it menus that the flow of the modifications of the mitid is eternal.

As light and darkness are relative,^ light having less of darkness and darkness having Jess of light, so every **modification** is only a mixture of Vidyft and AvidyA—the former having less of AvidyA aud the latter less of Vidyfl. This is the difference between the two. The acme of VidyA is discriminative discernment, though even iu that there is a streak of Kgoism (AsniitA), while in Avidya there is also a cognition of the existence of the egoistic lookerou pertaining to the self as r'I am", "I know" etc. Jn reality all knowledge is partly real nnd partly unreal, when there is preponderance of truth it is called VidyA and in the context of preponderance of error it is called AvidyA. Taking an oyster for a piece of silver does not come within the category of Avidyft. They come under error. All errors are misconceptions while AvidyA is that wrong cognition which is opposed to salvation and should be ^removed : so it is related to the practice of yoga. This distinction should be noted.