## **ON CONCENTRATION 55**

**"I** CENTRAL LIBRARY

taiors. It rtfers, however, to those subtle subliminal impressions of nescience which are responsible for diseamate existence as *<sup>a</sup>* I>eva etc. Birth is only resurgence of self under the influence of previous latent impressions, its existence for a limited period and its destruction afterwards- The life of iJevas or of those who »rc in their elemental principles can, therefore, be called birth, In the Sftihkhya Shtras it has been stated that those who are in their elemental state emerge again as submerged men do from water. Therefore, Bhava is the latent impression of nescience which is responsible for birth. What is the reason for *<sup>a</sup>* diseamate's birth ? It is the non-realisation of the distinction between the self or Purina and Prakfti and its mutations. They (the discarnatej reach that slate by force of the impressions of their concentration. Thus the subtle latent impression of nescience involving rebirth is the Hliava of the discarnute etc. Subtle nescience means that which is not gross like the nescience of those who have not experienced concentration and which has not been completely destroyed by realisation of discriminative knowledge. The Bhava of ordinary sentient beings is the nnattenuated latent **impressions** of nescience in the shape of afflictive KaTiu&iaya or latencies inspiring continued activity.

(2) Discamate Devas- When a Yogin having realised the true nature of the gross elements delights in abandoning their pursuit and considers such abnegation as the highest attainment or having grown indifferent to sights, sounds, etc. completely shuts out their exi>erfences, then their senses dry up for want of contact with knowablt or receivable objects, because the senses cannot remain manifest for a moment without contact with their corresponding objects. Such Yogins, by resisting the intake of objects or developing detachment, when they give up their bodies, having acquired the impressions of abnegations of sense elements, got into a state of objectless concentration Jjnd thus enjoy a state analogous to the state of Kaivalyn or isolation for a limited period according to the strength of their latencies. These are the riisentnate Dens. On the other hand, YogiuS who without trying to shut out experience of knowable objects, remain satisfied with I lie 'Contemplation of the principles relating to the instruments of