## **3G YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF FATA^JALf**

calm but turbid water while concentration is iike calm aiu<sup>I</sup> **clear water\***

The commentator has given three examples to bring out the threefold composition of sleep and its nature as a Vftti, In such sleep there is an indistinct feeling which produces the memory of sleep. As a matter of fact, before sleeping wc only recollect the feeling of sleep experienced before. Coni' pared to waking and dreaming, sleep is a Tamas-modif) catiom From the S.lstras also wc know that .sleeping is ;t Tanias attribute\* It has been said before Lhal modification of tlie mind is rt Sort of cognition\* In deep sleep an inert, obscure feeling comes over the senses and the mental modification caused thereby, is only a knowledge thereof. In waking and dreaming, mental modification, *i.c.* PramSna etc. arises, but iu deep sleep there is no such modification. Sleep is a state relating to the power of retention, or in other words, the languid sensation in the body causing an obscure feeling in the sense-organs is sleep and the knowledge of that feeling is tlie mental modification known as the ChittR-Vptti called sleep\*

To stop the mental modification due to sleep, the first thing to be practised is constant calmness of the body\* By that, sleep, which is the reaction for making up the loss due to bodily waste, becomes unnecessary. Even when the body remains calm, for cooling the brain mi e-pointedness and Smfti-Sadhan a (or cultivation of memory according to prescribed method) are necessary\* That is the chief practice for resisting sleep. That is called Sattva-Saihsevana {cultivation of self-cognition)\* Constant watchfulness directed towards self-knowledge, *t,g.* 'I won't forget myself', this kind of watchfulness is called Samprajanya, To be established in such practice all day and night long, can only lead to conquest of sleep ; and one-pointedneaa in it leads to Samprajiiftta Yoga. Only after attaining and then superseding the latter can one attain AsamprajSSta concentration.

As in ordinary life soinctituts extraordinary powers arc manifested, so sleeplessness (not the disease insomnia) can tome to some\* But as this is not accompanied by stoppage of other mental fluctuations, it cannot be regarded as Yoga.