## **sili YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATASjALt**

the former characteristic ami the uprising of another. Tliv difference of such changes is the result of their sequence, i.\*, the changes differ according to the change of sequence, We do not\* as a matter of fact, see the actual succession of changes because that is a momentary subtle imitation. We rcallv sec the end (result*}* of the mutation. The commentator has explained Inter that K\$ana (time a Loin] means tlic minutest conception of time in which the smallest particle (of knowledge) in respect of *<sup>n</sup>* thing appears to change\* Therefore real sequence is the momentary change of the minutest particle. Thus the series **of vibrations** of TamiiStras (subtle elements) **is** tin? **int**mite sequence of external mutations, while the mutation of the dimensionless Intellect or subtle 'I'-feeling **is** the minute sequence **of** internal change.

One change succeeding another is called its sequence\* When a clod of earth becomes a pot, the character of pot is the sequence of tlit character of clod. This is sequence of characteristic. Similar is the case of symptoms and states,

Present is the sequence of the future, mid past is the sequence of the present. This is the sequence of symptoms\* When a new pot is called old, without losing its symptom of being existent and there is no change of characteristic, it is said to have undergone a change of state. Change of location is also a change of state. Change of characteristic lias to be looked nt from the standpoint that characteristics are separate from substratum.

(2) <sup>1</sup><sup>l</sup> has **been** stated before that one characteristic can **be** the **substratum** of **another** characteristic. It **has** also **been** shown that from the spiritual (transcendental) point of view the characteristic and substratum merge into each other when they resolve in the uumanifest fundamental PradhRnn\* Then it becomes **futile** to make a distinction **between** the substratum and the characteristic. Then it may only be said that the mutation of the suppressing arid the **suppressed,** exists **in** the potential stale but whose mutation it is that cannot be **ascertained.** The mutating force is the REija.s **principle** in equilibrium\* Overseeing (by the PtlTU\$a) of the uneven **State** of the three CViiueis, or mutation of Fradh&na as knowable, is the cause ot