## **YOGA PHILOSOPHY Of PATASjALT**

mind becomes inclined towards power and sense objects. **When** it is mostly influenced by Tamas it inclines to corrupt deeds\* ignorance\* non-detachment and weakness (4)\* When the veil of infatuation is completely removed and the mind becomes completely luminous\* that is to say\* when it has a clear conception *oi* the subject, the instruments of cognition\* and the objects cognised, and when it is influenced by a tract of Rajas\* then the mind tends towards virtuousness\* wisdom\* detachment and power. (5) When the contamination of Rajas is entirely removed\* then the mind rests in itself (6), realises the distinction between Buddhi and the pure Self\* and proceeds to that form of contemplation which is known as Dharmamegha-dhyuna. Devotees describe this form of contemplation as the highest wisdom. Chiti-Sakti or consciousness is unchangeable, ^intransmissible, illuminator only of things presented to it by Buddhi\* pure and infinite (7). Viveka-Khyati or the realisation of the distinction between the pure Purusa and Buddhi, is or the nature of the Sattva principle and is thus opposed to Chiti-Sakti (8). As there is still a touch of impurity in Viveka-Khyati, a mind indifferent to it shuts out even that realisation. In such a state the mind retains the latent impressions alone. That is known as NirvTja or objectless Samadhi. It is called Asamprajnata Yoga because in this state there is no Samprajnana (9). Thus Yoga which is cessation of the fluctuations of the mind can be of two kinds :

{]) The suppression of the fluctuations ot the mind or Yoga is tlie highest mental power\* *In* connection with the philosophy of salvation *we* find in the Mahabharata ; "There is no knowledge like that of Samkhya and uo power like that of Yoga/' How the cessation of the fluctuations can be

**8**