## **suPERNORM**<sup>A</sup> **<sup>L</sup> FOW**E**<sup>R</sup> <sup>S</sup> 295**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

Symptomatic change happens as follows. Take closeness (of mind) : it is associated with three periods oF time\* When this state of being closed, does not fasten on the first period of time which is yet to be, and without changing its character, manifests itself as present, that is its second period. At that time, however\* it does not lose its connection with the future and past symptoms. Similarly fluctuation (of mind) has also three periods. Leaving its present phase it merges into the past without changing its characteristic\* This is the third stage. Then it docs not also lose the (unmaniFested) feature\* which it has with the future and the present. Its second period is when it is visible and its action is noticeable\* And it is not detached from past or future symptoms\* Nirodha or closeness of mind is also like this, so also is the fluctuated state.

Change ofstate—At the time of Nirodha, the latencies of closeness become powerful and the latencies of fluctuations become weak.. This is known as the change of state of the characteristics. It is to be remarked here that a change in the characteristics denotes a change in the thing characterised, the three symptomatic changes relate to the characteristics, and change of state relates to the symptoms (3). The cycle of Gunas cannot exist for a moment when freed from these mutations. The cycle oT Guna-modificationy *i.c.* the product of Gunas is never changeless, they are always moving and changeable. The nature of the Gupas (4) is said to be responsible for this tendency, *viz\** their transformation into action. The three kinds of changes (5) that take place in the Bhutas and the sense-organs (in the objective and instrumental phenomena), which accept the category of substance (the characterised) and attribute (the character), and are the objects of relational distingui-