## **3® YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF FATaJ^JALI**

**because Tattva-dr^ti of the reflective point of view and Vynvnbilrft-drfti or the practical point of view, are different. Tilting this difference, the tiling; and its characteristics are regarded as different. If from the practical side these two are regarded as the same then the characteristics would appear to have no basis or to be really non-existent. It would be altogether illogical to Call art existent thing basically nonexistent. From the point of view of general principles, we arrive at the basic fundamentals which ultimately are reduced to the three Gupas, Sattva, Rajas and Tanias, At that stage there is no means of distinguish!ng a thing from its characteristics. They are not non-case, neither arc they manifest ; so they are existing iu utimanifested condition. Ultimately, aiso the thing and its characteristics become erne. Therefore, the Gupas nrc neither phenomena nor nouinena, they cannot bt understood by thost: terms.**

**From the practical point of view there must he past and future states. Therefore, to call everything present would he absurd from that point of view. A characteristic is only :i practical indication, that is why it has to bt' expressed bv the three epochal states, of which present is the one when u is known, and the past and the future a^e those when it is not known. The condition in which they basically exist is the substratum of the object.**

**In effect the whole creation also docs exist ill an tinman [tested slate. That is why, Saiukhyu philosophy does not admit total annihilation. In the uiimanifested state nothing can be realised on account of subtlety of the form. Subtlety means remaining unsepuratcd from its associates or causes and thus in an nnpcrceivcd state,**

**(7) In regard to symptoms it can be objected that if the present is not separate from the past and the future, then the three are present simultaneously and are overlapping. This objection is tin substantial. Past and future are absent things and thus imaginary. To establish relationship ju imagination with the imaginary things is to form notions of the past and the future with reference to the present. That which is perceivable is regarded as manifest, and we call it the present.**