## <sup>128</sup> VOCA PHILOSOPHY OT FATAftjALJ

**all the Kk-saa. The lire of PrasaAkhyana or discriminative knowledge sterilises the attenuated Kksas like roasted seeds. When they are attenuated, they cannot obscure the realisation of the distinction between Buddhi and Purusa. Such realisation then lapses in the absence oT the manifestation of the Gunas,**

**(]). Impurities are destroyed hy Kriy.Wogo. The impurities are the restlessness and the dullness of the sense-organs\* bom of Rajas and Tanias inherent in them. Therefore with the elimination of impurities\* Chitta turns towards Sam^dhi. Moreover\* impurity is cjnly an aggravated form of KleAa** *\*,* **hence through its diminution, Klesas are also attenuated.**

**WllCM Klesas become thin they become ready for extinction. Properly attenuated Klesas become unproductive through Prasiinkhy&na (self-knowledge) or Samprajnaus (Knowledge of truth) or Viveks (discriminative knowledge). Just as a fried seed does not sprout, so Kle^a reduced by Samprajhana to an unproductive state does not give rise to modifications of the mind. For example :—fI am the body' is an erroneous afflictive belief based on nescienceL When through the force of SalUadhi the Mnhat-tattva (pure I-seose) is realised^ then it is correctly seen that \*1 am not the body', fn the engrossed state the mind remains always established in that knowledge and the afflictive modification ct'e. '1 am the body' becomes like a roasted seed ; from the Latent impression of the belief that 1 am the body' another such modification does not arise and all feelings based on such a belief get extinguished for all time. The impression of the notion that \*1 sun the body" is one bom of Kleia\* while the impression of the notion that T am not the body\* is one horn of true knowledge and is thus non-afflictive. The latter is also called Prajnft-Samskira. When with the knowledge of the distinction between Ituddhi and Puru^a tlie luind becomes inactive through supreme detachment, the traces of Pranjiia, which are but tlie sterilised states of the Kle£as\* also disappear [vide Siitrn.fi 1-50 and 11-10). The unproductive state is the subtle state of Klesa <sup>j</sup> this is secured by SamprajFi&ua or correct knowledge, while the attenuated state of Klesa is obtained by Kriyfi-yoga.**