## **YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATASjAU**

has to be practiced. At first, tlie ability for the practice of suspension comes on after a long interval of time. But later it becomes frequent\* When the lungs are full, or much Contracted\* suspension does not often take place : in that case, only the external and, internal operations are possible.

External operation\* internal operation and suspension—these three forms of PriiiAyama practised according to the observation\* of space\* time and number, gradually become long and subtle. Among them, observation of the spread over in space is the first stage. Space has to be taken **itL** two senses—external and internal. From the tip of the nose to the point up to which the flow of breath is extended\* is the external space\* Inside the body\* the movement oT air up to the heart region shows the internal space. Starting from the breast the entire body from the top of the head to the soles of the feet, also constitutes internal space,

PrattayAitifi practised with observation as to how far the flow of the exhaling air from the tip of the nose can be **shortened,** is called observation of external space\* This gradually weakens the exhalation. That is\* PrflyaySma performed villi the intention of making the movement of the breath gradually milder is called Pra\iftyflma with the observation of external space. The internal space has to be perceived by feeling. When the **inhaled** air enters the lungs, it **should** be felt in the breast. This constitutes Pr&tiayjinia with the observation of internal space.

Talcing the breast or region of the heart as the centre, wheu the air is inhaled, it has to be felt that a feeling of touch is spreading all over the body from about the heart, and during exhalation the touch is being gathered and returning to the heart region. In this way it is necessary in the beginning to regard the whole body (specially tip to the soles of the feet and the two palms) as the space under observation. This purifies the nerves, and the faculty offeeling spreading throughout the entire body becomes unobstructed, that is, the Sattvikft faculty of sentience is gained and therefrom a comfortable feeling is felt, throughout the body. When Prfl^ayftma is practised with such feeling of comfort, it produces good result. Failing that it may make the body ill.