## **334 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATANJALI**

Iti determining the solar entrance first \$u\$umtiA has to be fixed. Heart is the point. of contact between the soul and the body. In **Other** words, the most sen (lent part of the body is the heart. The breast is generally the centre of the U'-feeling ; therefore the most sentient and subtle feeling part thereof, is the heart. The current of subtle feeling flowing Up towards the brain is the Sti?umnS. Siijiminri is not to be looked for in the gross body, but is only to be located by meditation. According to the modern physiologists the S11411111H& is located inside the spinal cord but according to the ancients a particular tipgoing nerve from the heart is called Su\$umu&. The yogiu wilfully suppressing the action of the body and thus any feelings therein, would last of all give up the sentient portion and become discarnate. This portion is called Susn in no or solar entrance, Oti account of some connection with the sun it is culled the solar entrance. It is said in the iiistras, 'Tbr lamp-like thing situated within the heart lias innumerable rays one of which goes up right through the solar region. After passing the Prabmaloha the departing ,sonl gets to the highest point with the help of this ray'. Thus one of the rays of the effulgent light mentioned before (**1**-**36**<sup>1</sup> is the Suisiminj, entrance or Solar entrance.

On practising Sailiyama oti this particular ray of effulgent light a knowledge of the whole universe is revealed. The regions of tlie universe are both gross and subtle and of them, Avichi etcare without illumination, therefore, they cannot be seen with the gross material light. Ordinary sunlight cannot illumine them. It is only the developed power of sense-faculty, which does not wait for an illuminator but sees things by its own power of illumination, can have knowledge of the universe. One reason for not taking the words 'solar entrance' to imply the auo, is that Saniyain;i on the sun can only reveal the sun, how can it bring knowledge of other regions like Tiralimaloka etc. ?

On account of similarity between the microcosm and the macrocosm, the unity of the Sri\$u inn**3** nerve and the regions of the universe has; been spoken of. Every **creature** has its supermundane soul, and nil-pen\*adin g Intellect is only limited by the action of the senses. As these limitations disappear the power of the Intel **h-cL** goes **on** increasing **mid** he goes ou from one region to <sup>A</sup> higher region. Thus the elimination of the coverings on the