## **ON CONCENTRATION** *49*

CENTRAL LIBRARY

and its knowledge, even though it be in respect of subtle objects. Meditative analysis is its special feature. It id\* therefore free from gross objects. Subtle matter aud subtle faculties of reception are the subjects of this concentration,. As in such concentration subtle subjects of contemplation are realised by Vichftra or analysis it is called Savichara. This ns well as Nirvichftra being both established through analysis, both art cases of concentration based on Vichara. It is the kiud of meditative analysis through which wt have to pass in arriving at Prakrit from Vilcfti or its modifications. Similarly, knowledge of Heya (things to be avoided)t Heyahetu {causes of avoidablcsj, flfiua (avoidance), Hinopaya (means of avoidance) which dawns through concentration, is also attained by analysis. As the fundamental principles and subtle yogic ideals are realised through such thinking, the concentration on subtle subjects is called Vich&r&taugata. Samad hi,

(4) (concentration on bliss is free from Vitarka and VicbSra, It is not in respect of gross or subtle things- The object or basis of this concentration is a particular feeling of Sattvika happiness felt all over the mind and the senses due to a particular stut£ of Calmness. The body is the receptacle of the mind, the sense-organs, organs of action and the Pranas or vital energies- Consequently, that sense of happiness is like a natural feeling of tranquillity or S&ttvika calmness of the whole body. Thus Sananda-Snm^dlii (or concentration on the felicity of mind} realty relates to the sense-organs or instruments of reception. That peace, i-r. inactivity of the bodily organs, gives more happiness than their being engaged in action is known Troiu this kind of SnmAdlii, A Vogin who has realised this bliss, quietens his sense-oTgans in this mariner aud thus conserves his energy.

Through a special kind of Pr&niySma (breath control) **or** by concentration on vital parts of the body, the bodv becomes calm when a filing of bliss pervades the body. If concentration is practised on that feeling altme, a fooling of bliss gradually comes over all the sense-organs- That is the practice of S&nandu-^amftdlu. There is not **so** much dependence on spoken words as in the case of Vitarka, because it is a matter of feeling, of bliss felt- Nor is there any need in it for thin king as

O.P. 132—7