## **50 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OK PATAJSJAM**

**I**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

**in the case of approach to TanmStras from the Rhutas, not even of subtle BliftLas which is the basis of coneetitration where VichSra prevails. That is why this concentration on bliss is free from Vitarka and VichAra. Spoken in terms of Sain&patti, it is the subject of Nirvich&ra SamUpatti or engrossment free from reasoning- It is salt! in the Scriptures** thaL **the pleasure that is derivable from making the senses free from the influence of their corresponding worldly objects by constant practice and lumping up the senses in the miud is not comparable to anything obtainable from heavenly or worldly things attainable through personal exertion,**

**(5-8) Concentration with Vitarka and Vich&ra is dependent on and relates to knowable objects. Concentration based on** *a* **feeling of felicity relates to the instruments of cognition\* while that based On \*I-sensCf (or dynamic Eigo) relates to the subject of Cognition, As the latter relates only to the COgaiser\* i.»( to conceptions like "I am the receiver of the bliss\*', and thus concerns only the it is free frotn the touch of bliss, TThis implies a state beyond the feeling of bliss and not one which is unblissful, It is a more coveted state than bliss, being of the nature of peace (quiescence), \* In SAnanda-DhyJVua or meditation with the blissful feeling as its basis, the feeling of happiness or bliss pervades the senses and the sense-organs. In concentration based on the T-sense1, the feeling of bliss is not the object but the receiver of that experience is the object on which concentration is based. This is the difference between Sananda-Samadbi and SAsmita-SamAdhi. Puru^a or pure consciousness is not the subject of any concentration. AsmitA-MAtra or pure 'I-feeling**<sup>1</sup> **is the subject of this concentration. This '1-feeling\* is called the cognistr. It is manifested with the help of the Pur** <sup>115</sup>**a. The object concentrated upon in SAsmita-SamAdlii is not the real Puruju but its imitation, the Pseudo-Seer—the Empirical Ego or the Mahnt, In the SAihkhya philosophy it is called the Mahat\*Tattwa- It is Rudd hi shaped after the Ftiru\$ap a feeling of 'I know myself1, a sort of feeling of identity between the pure consciousness and individual intellect or Buddhi,**

**Ruddhi-Tflttwa or the principle of Ruddhi is the first of the manifested. However subtle the knowledge might be,**