## जहाित यदा कामासवपाथ मनोगतान्। आमयेवामना तु : िथततदोयते॥५५॥

55. O Pārtha, when one fully renounces all the desires that have entered the mind, and remains satisfied in the Self alone by the Self, then he is called a man of steady wisdom.

In the verses beginning from, 'When one fully renounces...', and ending with the completion of the Chapter, instruction about the characteristics of the man of steady wisdom and the disciplines (he had to pass through) is being given both for the one who has, indeed, applied himself to steadfastness in the Yog of Knowledge after having renounced rites and duties from the very beginning, [\(91\)](#page--1-0) and for the one who has (applied himself to this after having passed) through the path of Karma-Yog. For in all the scriptures without exception, dealing, with spirituality, whatever are the characteristics of the man of realization are themselves presented as the disciplines for an aspirant, because these (characteristics) are the result of effort. And those that are the disciplines requiring effort, they become the characteristics (of the man of realization). [\(92\)](#page--1-1)

O Pārtha, *yadā*, when, at the time when; *prajahāti*, one fully renounces; *sarvān*, all; the *kāmān*, desires, varieties of desires; *manogatān*, that have entered the mind, entered into the heart—.

If all desires are renounced while the need for maintaining the body persists, then, in the absence of anything to bring satisfaction, there may arise the possibility of one's behaving like lunatics or drunkards. [\(93\)](#page--1-2) Hence it is said: *Tusṭah*, remains satisfied; *ātmani eva*, in the Self alone, in the very nature of the inmost Self; *ātmanā*, by the Self which is his own—indifferent to external gains, and satiated with everything else on account of having attained the nectar of realization of the supreme Goal; *tadā*, then; *ucyate*, he is called; *sthita-prajñah*, a man of steady wisdom, a man of realization, one whose wisdom, arising from the discrimination between the Self and the not-Self, is stable.