## YOC:A fHILOSOPJlY OK PATA^JALT

more so than ht-atp light etc. It can be argued that the vibration of solid, liquid or gaseous things causes sound, therefore sound is their property. In one sense it is true that it is one oftheir properties but the vibration only manifests itself taking them as support. If a search were made LO find out where the power of vibration resides, it will be seen that externally it resides principally in the things where heal\* electricity etc. are found, and internally it will be found Lo reside in the mind. All kinds of external sound vibrations are principally produced by heat etc\* <sup>i</sup> by volition too the organ of speech is vibrated to produce sound. In speech although the sound is given out by the uerves of the throat vibrating, it is really a sort of transference of muscular energy.

What is that power which manifests itself as sound, heat or light ? In reply it must be admitted that it is itself without (r.f. beyond) any sound, beat or light\* That which is free from these attributes, is called void or vacancy or AkA^a- By a vague concept it is called emptiness or void, but that lias no real existence. Blit the energy that manifests itself as sound\* light, etc. doe\* exist. IF *a.* tiling which exists but has no property of sound or light etc,, has to he conceived, it has to he imagined as AkAia or void. The Conception of void can only be formed purely by a word concept, as no real concept tion of such a thing can be Formed. When a sound is heard an outside conception is formed blit no idea of its form can be conceived. Thus an external existence full of sound but without any substance is AkAsa, Moreover, all vibrations indicate a void as there can be no vibration where there is no vacancy. On account of this vacancy, solid, liquid and gaseous things can emit sound by vibration. This vacancy or voidness can be relative, as compared to a solid a gaseous substance is more void. Absolute void is an inconceivable thing but comparative void is a reality.

Kar—the solid organ of hearing, must have vacancy in it as it can receive vibrations. The .sense-organ relating to kinship with vacancy or void is the organ of hearing (all sense-organs are formed of similar kinships) with appropriate elements. In other words\* the ossicles etc., the solid parts of the organ