## **<sup>182</sup>** *yoga* **philosophy qi pataRjali**

(4) Nature of being the object of tbc Ftint?A -\* experience And **emancipation** arc the two states witnessed by the Puru^m Unless there is witnessing of the Puru^a the Giuuis remain unmanifest. They have then no modifications and they Cease to function\* Hence their power of producing objects is dependent on Purusa's witnessing, i.r. they act for the sake of the Puru\$a. As only on account of the witnessing of the Pitru^Oj the **proximate** Gnnas provide experience or liberation, they are said to produce result by nearness\* This nearness is no spatial proximity but inclusion in the same cognition, \*1 am conscious' in this cognition both sentience and the insentient instruments of sense are included ; that is the proximity of the Gubins and the Puru?s [(IMT)(I)].

As a lodestone draws iron whenever it conies near, although it does not enter into the iron, even so the Guyas without entering into the Puruja produce effect only by nearness. The word fUpaklra' means to act by nearness.

(5) "Without any cause etc\*"«the cause in which <sup>a</sup> particular Guna in dominant constitutes the Pralyaya. For instance, merit is the cause of S&ttvika modification\* Of the three Guests the two which have no cause to manifest themselves, remain subsidiary to the dominant one. The Gifnas are collectively known as PrarihJlmi **ot** Prakyti. That which is die material cause of an object is called Prakfti\* Primordial Prahj-li is known as Fradliiltia\* Prakfti in the shape of the three Gupns constitutes the material cause of the entire internal and external phenomenal world.

Without a clear idea about the three G-unas it is very difficult to comprehend Saipkhya-yogtf or the philosophy of emancipation\* That is why they are being described in greater detail here. All objects other than the Self can be broadly divided into two classes, *viz\** Grahapa ^lit. reception or the organic energies both mental and corporal) and GrMiya (lit. receivable or cognisable or knowablc)\* All that are cognised constitute objects, while the instruments of rec^tion are the **senses,** lly these <sup>i</sup> listrumtuts objects are either known, moved or retained. Sound etc. are objects of knowledge, speech etc. are **objects** of action, and lidding the body etc. are objects of retention- When sound as an object is analysed, sentient state