## ON CONUF.NTRA LTON *IT*

CENTRAL LIBRARY

word 'Chaitra' will only bring the recollection (which is not a Fram^a) of Chaitra\* The knowledge of 'existing at a certain place1 will only Tall Under the category of Premia\* If Chaitra was not seen before^ the statement will not convey any particular information about Chaitra. Inference or verbal communication can only convey general and partial information-

al Outcome — Result of the perceptual process. Vijiiilnabhikju says it is the 'effect of V^tti as Karaya'\* In illustrating the expression \*the self's awareness of this modification' he says that it is like the cognition of \*1 am knowing the pot\ lint that kind of cognition might be of two kinds. In direct apprehension, the perception is of 'This is a pot' or 'Tile pot exists". But as it contains a reference to the subject, it can be analytically expressed as 'I am seeing tlie pot". Again, while seeing a pot one feels L1 am seeing a pot1, The first awareness, *viz.* of 'the pot exists' is primarily Unreffective perception and the second one, *viz.* of 'I am seeing the pot\* is predominantly reflective perception- The first This is <sup>a</sup> pot" OT cthe pot exists' is direct perception. In that direct perception there function three ideas—'I', "tlit pot' and 'seeing', but when the pot is being seen then it is felt, only **that** the pot exists ; and" the sect, the act of seeing and the object seen are not felt in separation. The knowledge **of T** am **the** \*eer' being absent, and the presence only of the pot being felt, the seer implied in the 'I -feeling1 and the apprehended 'pot' appear to bt undifferentiated. This has been stated already in the 4th Sfitra. The mental modification due to direct jjerceptiou may last for a moment and may be followed by its 'current , But when the perceptual modification concerning 'a pot1 arises, then it is not differentiated as <sup>M</sup> am seeing the poi\ there is only the feeling that the 'pot' is present, hi knowing the pot, the seer behind it is present ; that is why the seer can **be** said to exist in an undifferentiated form in **the** awareness of **the** pot though as *<sup>A</sup>* natter of fact they are really different.

This can be understood in another way\* All knowledge is a transformation of Ahamkara or 'Me-feding'. Of these, perceptual knowledge is the transmutation of the 'Me-FceJing' due to the action of au external object. Therefore, knowledge of a pot is only a modification of the 'Me\*feeling\*\* lint the seer fe