## ON PRACTICE <sup>171</sup>

CENTRAL LIBRARY

**Haw is this contact perpetuated ? Rv the latent impression or tin- idea of the contact, Frotn erroneous latency of wrung cognition comes wrong knowledge of \*1T-sense, and that is how the T~scuse is propagated. Every perception rises and dissolves, and another perception takes place ; that is why this contact has a break. and is not continuous. As the kiiowtr and the knowable exist from time without beginning\* this form of intermittent union (like the T-seusc) is like ail eternal flow,** *t.f.* **momentary contact and break are going on from time without beginning (it however, to be noted that though it might be bcginningless it need not be endless). Of this (low of erroneous doa-di^crimination having no beginning the question cannot be asked as to when tills coutaet began. Therefore, the idea entertained by many that once l>rak|ti and Lhnu^a were separate and suddttily their union took place, is very tillphilosophical and irrational. The opposite idea or Yivckw is the conception of the knouer and the lcnowable as being separate which would shut out the other ferroneous) knowledge, When other Vyttis slop\* discrimination also ceases like a lamp going out for want of oik That is breach of the contact between the knower and the knowahle. It should, however, be noted that PuTU\$ft is equally witness to (m. disinterested in) both the contact and its break. This union beyond time and space \*if the knower and the knowable is indicative of the natural ability of both.**

**The term union or identity applied to the knower ttol the knowable is only an expression of nearness and it is based on inisapprehensiou, Misapprehension relates to more than one existing thing,, thus real things being its material mid subject, as well as it being a kind of knowledge, the united things, pii. T-scuse, desire, pleasure, paiti etc. arising therefrom are also realities : liberation from sorrow by true knowledge arising out of existing discriminative discernment is also thus a reality. The object of knowledge may be real or not, but it^ knowledge is a reality and ltlfian never be non-existent.**

**Remaining contiguous is called spatial contact and to yi> near i.s called effecting contact. 'Remaining near' is hot a thing but <sup>a</sup> particular Condition of things. So 'goiug near' is iiv action, tile result of wliicti is the meaning of the word 'contact'-**