## **ON CONCENTRATION t2i**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

**latent impressions leading to salvation gather force. 'When the mind ceases to function\* the Purusa gets isolated in Himself, and that is why He is then called pure and liberated.**

**(Here concludes the Chapter on Concentration being the first part of the Comments of Vyasa known as Samkhya-P^avachana on the Yoga Philosophy of Patanjali.)**

**(a) The latent impressions acquired in Sampraji&ta SamiUlhi i.e. the latent impressions of knowledge obtained through SamprajSata relate to principles or realities. When knowledge is acquired of the true character of the principles and the difference between the Puru^a and the Lnowables as well as the imworthiness of the kuowables are completely realised then their knowledge as well as their latent impressions are regarded as renoitnceable\* That is how the latent impression of Nirodha Sainadhi or complete restraint is opposed to i.c. shuts out knowledge as well as the latent impressions acquirable in Saraprajflfina. It might be argued that as stoppage of cognition is not a form of knowledge\* how can there be latent impression thereof\* In reply it £.may be explained that Nirodha is nothing but broken fluctuation\* and the latent impression is of that break of fluctuation. The impressions of a broken line can be called the broken parts of a line or the broken parts of 110-line. Complete renunciation can give Hse to latent impressions, which only bring stoppage of mutation and thus slop the mind from fluctuating. There is going on incessantly** *<sup>a</sup>* **break between the appearance and disappearance of modification;',** *ol* **the mind, which break is only lengthened in concentration on Xirodha Samitdhi. Then the sentient, mutative and static principles do not die out but their unbalanced activity due <sup>U</sup> nomeqiiilibrium that was taking place on being overseen <sup>1</sup>>> the Furu^a onlv coasts on account of tho cessation of the cjuih (Avidyi or nesc^nce) which brought about their; contact.**

Once Asamprujuftta Niiodha takes place that does not last t'oT **ever, but** that Nirodha or cessation of modifications i^ **prolonged** by practice. Consequently there is **latent Impression thereof.** That cessation of modifications of the mind through force **of latent** impressions **is** called Xirodha K\$afra—*i-t\** nu uu-ti<sup>L</sup>