## **214 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAfrjALl**

(primal constituent) were always in a stale of inactivity \* it will become Apradhana (i\r+ subsidiary and not primal) as it would not then produce any modification. Similarly, if it were always in a state of movement or modification> it will also become Apradhana on account of not being their primal cause. When there is a tendency of both quiescence and movement,, it gains its status of Pradhana (primal) otherwise it could not be regarded as such. Whatever other reasons arc thought of, this line of argument is applicable". 5. Some hold that the faculty of apprehension is misapprehension. "Pradhana+s propensity to make itself known"—this text of Sruti is their authority. Pumsa, the knower of all knowablcs, docs not cognise Pradhana before its manifestation, nor is Pradhana, which is capable of producing all effects, then overseen by Pulhipa. 6. Others say that the characteristic of both (Purusa and Pradhana) is Adarsana or ignorance. According to this theory although knowledge is the property\*of Pradhana it is dependent on being seen by the Purusa when it becomes the character of the object. Similarly, although it (knowledge) is not in the nature of the Purusa yet depending on Him as it does for illumining the object, it appears to be an attribute of Purusa. 7. Some designate knowledge itself as Adarsana or ignorance. 8. These are only differences of opinion in the Sastras. Although there are various notions like these in respect of Adarsana or wrong conception, it is recognised by all that "the Adarsana in the widest sense of the term, is that contact of the Purusas with the Gunas which every object presupposes as its cause".

**(1) Alliance is the cause, the result of which is realisation of the object as <sup>a</sup> property of the lord or proprietor, tlie Purusa, The conjunction of Purina and Prakrti produces cognition, That**