## **146 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAStJALI**

## **Karmatayti Or Moral Merit And Demerit Which Are Based On Afflictions, Become Active In Thin Life Or In A Life To Come (I). 12.**

Merit and demerit arise from desire\* greed, delusion or anger. They become operative in the present life or in an unseen life\* Out of these the impressions of pious actions gathered from Mantras repeated, austerities observed\* or Sarnadhi attained with deep detachment or through Worship of **Gods** the Devas, Maharsis or saints\* fructify quickly\* Similarly the impressions of vicious actions\* performed with excessive Avidya Klcsas in regard to creatures who are frightened, diseased or pitiable or to those who have come Tor refuge, or are noble-minded or engaged in austerities\* bear fruit immediately. For example\* young Nandisvara passed out of the human form and was transformed into a 0eva , while Nahusa\* a ruler in heaven, passed out of his own form and was transformed into a reptile. Amongst these, those who are in purgatory do noC gather any such merit or demerit to be experienced in that life, while those who have thinned their afflictions *(e.g.* Jivan Muktas *i.e.* freed while alive) do not carry with them any such latent impressions which might fructify in a future life (2)\*

**(i) KarmSkva - latent impressions of actions\* The latent impressions of virtuous and vicious actions are KaruiA^ayas. Any manifest state of the mind leaves a like imprint on it jud this is its latent impression. Smhsk4ra or latent impression may be either Savija or poteut or NirvJja** *i.e.* **impotent. Potent Samstaras are of two kinds—-those which are bom of afflictions and Lhose which are their opposites <sup>r</sup> in other wJrds SaniskJlras based on ignorance, and those based on knowledge. The potent Samsk&xas based ou Klesas are called Kann&snyas. They are classed t\*s white, black anti black and white, or divided into two classes Virtuous and vicious or white and black only.**