## **<sup>1200</sup> YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATA^JALJ**

**does not lead to suspension of tlit activities of the mind, though it may help such suspension. After perfecting Prflpftyfltna if One practises control over the mind by means of Dhilraiia etc. then alone one may advance in the path of Yoga ; otherwise one will gain nothings except keeping the body like a corpse for a period of time.**

**Apart from this, there are other methods of restraining the activities of PrSna. Those who concentrate the mind by Isvara-Franidh.lna (devotion to fiod) or Dlilrana in Con scion sness, when their concentration leads to supreme joy\* bringing in its train an effort for the S&ttvika form of restraint, by mean\* oT that also the functions of the Prana may be stopped. And if that concentration becomes constant being wholly absorbed in itd and reducing the diet without much trouble, or stopping food altogether\* Sam3dhi may be gained by stopping the activities of the Prana. The Mahabharata says, "'Ily reducing iht diet, they conquer the fifth fault,** *viz-* **the breath;"^ this injunction is intended for such spiritual aspirants. Through practice of devotion to God and Dharaua of the Sittvika type, the intensity of joy that is felt in the innermost being, gives rise to a strong desire to hold it as if by an embrace of the heart, which producing a Sattvika form of contraction of the nerve centres may stop the activities of the Pray. a. Just as in the process of Hatha-Yoga the impulse of contraction is externally produced, iu this process it is internally produced.**

**To stop the activity of the Prlna, which is a state of catalepsy, for a long time (in the way recommended iu Ha^ha\* Yoga) intestinal impurities have to be wholly removed, otherwise obstacle is created by putrid substances\* and the abdomen cannot be properly contracted. This does not become necessary in the process iu which total fast is observed, or a reduced diet (r.r. pure water, or water mixed with milk) is taken. Vide 1,19 (2).**

**With some people, the effort to stop the activity of the .Pr^iia comes almost naturally, Fy this means, they can more or less stop the Prana for a period of time. It is known that a person could remain buried under the ground continually for 10 or 12 days. At that time, he did not wholly lose his consciousness but was like an inert substance. Another person**