## OX PRACTICE 1G9

CENTRAL LIBRARY

oilier { it being noted that only what is directly perceived is present ) but the interval between the two is not noticeable or perceivable. That is why both are regarded as being present and perceived as simultaneous. The union of entities which are beyond time and space is neither in time nor in space. The only instance of such union or contact is the idea of the ultimate kuiower and the ultimate knowahle as one or united or identical. Kike all other forms of knowledge\* the knowledge of contact may be both correct and otherwise. When we use the word 'contact1 with reference to an actual state of things, then its usage is correct, *t.\$.* the contact between a bird and a tree represents a correct state of affairs. Bn <sup>I</sup> when through defective vision things, though separate, arc regarded as being united, that is incorrect knowledge. But it is true that, whether correct or incorrect, in both casts they are appearing to the observer as united. 'Contact1 or 'union! or **a** form **of 'praoemnty' is** only **a word** whik the united objects are real things. The concept conveyed by a word exists thongli there may not be a real object beyond it+ (The **concept** of the words may he correct, hut there may not be *<sup>a</sup>* real entity).

**When** separate thyigs come into **contact that** involves action, that action might he **of** one, of boLhT ot of the cognise! of **the** contact. This need not be illustrated, but it is to he **noted that** if through the action of the Cogniser separate things are regarded as united then it is only an incorrect cognition.

The Seer and the primal kuowable are not entities wtcudiug over time and space. **Time** and space are forms of knowledge : therefore, the kuower thereof is au entity beyond time and space. Also, the materia) of that knowledge (tfft. the three GUigas) would be naturally something beyond time and space. For these reasons the contact of the Seer and Lhe seen is neither spatial co-existence nor presence at the Millie time- More soH as they are not mttltal characteristics or substrata thereof, their union cannot ht- in time. The Ultimate Setyr atid the Ultimate Seed are not characterist ics of anything ; nor arc they the aggregates of any real characterise tics. Therefore, they are not entities united in time, in Furu^a there is uo such characteristic as past or present, because such things are inulubh-- Primordial Prak]ti has also no characteristic as past or present.

O.I\ 132—22