*Reply*: This defect does not arise. It is the intention of the Bhagavān that the *nitya-karmas* (daily obligatory duties) also have results; for the Bhagavān will say, 'The threefold results of actions the undesirable, the desirable and the mixed—accrue after death to those who do not resort to *tyāga*', and also, 'but never to those who resort to *sannyāsa* (monks)' (12). Indeed, by showing that, it is only in the case of *sannyāsins* (monks) alone that there is no connection with the results of actions, the Bhagavān asserts in, '... accrue after death to those who do not resort to *tyāga* (renunciation)' (ibid.), that the result of daily obligatory (*nitya*) duties accrue to those who are not *sannyāsins* (monks).

## यायं दोषविदयेके कम ाहम ु नीिषण:। यदानतप:कम न यायिमित चापरे॥३॥

3. Some learned persons say that action, beset with evil (as it is), should be given up, and others (say) that the practice of sacrifice, charity and austerity should not be given up.

*Eke*, some; *manīsinah*, learned ones, subscribing to the views of the Sānkhyas and others; *prāhuh*, say; that *dosavat*, beset with evil (as it is);—what is it?—*karma*, action, all actions, because they are the cause of bondage; *tyājyam*, should be given up even by those who are eligible for actions (rites and duties). Or, it (action) is to be given up *dosavat*, just as defects such as attachment etc. are renounced. *Ca* and, in that very context; *apare*, others; (say) that *yajña-dāna-tapah-karma*, the practice of sacrifice, charity and austerity; *na tyājyam*, should not be given up.

These alternatives are with regard to only those who are qualified for action, but not with regard to the monks who are steadfast in Knowledge and have gone beyond the stages of life. This discussion is not concerned with those who are held to be outside the scope of eligibility for action in the assertion (by the Bhagavān), 'The steadfastness in the Yog of Knowledge by men of realization was spoken of by Me in the days of yore' (see 3.3).