## <sup>18</sup> **YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF FATAfijALI**

As the mind ceases to function 'without these states, they are ■called its Vrttis.

f3) Through wrong knowledge, the adjuncts of the Funi?a in the shape of body, mind, etc. are constantly undergoing changes or they exist in a donna til state or move in a flow of births and deaths. This is what is meant by GunavikAra or the changes in the G-upas, When through correct knowledge nescience etc. is destroyed. the mental fluctuations connected with this correct knowledge counteract the operation of the Gunas and they are, therefore, know'll as Akli^ta Vrttis or harmless processes. For example, rtn illusion like the feeling that T am the body, or the fluctuations ■of the mind arising out of actions done under the influence of such an illusion are harmful processes founded on nescience. Deep **Contemplation** or conduct based on correct knowledge that T am not the body gives rise to processes which are free from afflictions. As the sequence of such fluctuations might terminate the assumption of the body, i.r. of the chain of births and deaths and thus of incorrect knowledge, these are called harmless or beneficial modifications conducive to the elimination of the operation of the Gniias\* When through the final discriminative knowledge, nescience is destroyed, the state of mind arising therefrom is the Akli^ta *par exetlitnct.* The mediate cognition of the distinction betvreen the Pnrtisa and Buddhi through verbal instruction, study and contemplation without atiy actual realisation of the same, is also an Aklf^ta state, but only in a secondary sense.

(4 & 5) It might be urged that it is hardly possible for creatures with a preponderance of 'harmful' Vrttis to have at All any 'beneficial' ones\* or for the latter to prove effective in the welter of the 'harmful' modifications of the mind. In reply, the commentator explains that the 'beneficial' modifications, though mixed with the harmful ones, remain distinct from them as a shaft of light coming into a dark room remains distinct from the surrounding darkness. The intervals of AbhyJLsa and detachment might be fruitful in giving rise to 'beneficial1 modifications. In the same manner through the loopholes in the stream of 'beneficial' fluctuations\* the 'harmful' ones might also creep in. As the ovctI modifications