## **yoca philosophy or fata&jali**

r

are born again. That is why Yogins first practise Vaslkflm, then the act of contemplating on the Pimp»a followed by a realisation of the difference between the conscious-like Buddhi and the knower Purlieu and thus become averse to the mi manifested aiui all the mutations thereof, i.«. Lhey become indifferent to the three Gunas whether in their manifest or *\i*umanifested (like voidj state.

(3) Attachment is a function of the Btiddhi or the inner senses. Hence non-attachment is also its function. In Pravjtti or attach ment we get predilection, while in Nivjrtti or detachment we get aloofness or cessation. That Buddhi which brings about a realisation of the Furu^aprinciple is called Agrya-Bnddhi or highest form of intellect\* Katba-Upatii\$ad says, "Subtle-minded sages realise Him through Agrya-Buddhi". When knowledge of the nature of Purn^a is acquired, then there is no more inclination in the satisfied mind to be engrossed in the Uumanifested Pr&kjti or the void ; on the other baud, it develops a desire to engage itself in the contemplation of the Furu**5**a-principle and thus get perpetual peace or be submerged in its constituent cause. A complete separation from the Gupas and tlieir mutations then arise. Para-Vair:lgya or highest detachment and unadulterated knowledge of the Puru^a-principle arc inseparable. By that only Kaivalya or Isolation, in the shape of complete cessation of the mind, is attainable,

(4) JfifluaprasEida or clarification of knowledge indicates the highest purification of knowledge. Mali's knowledge is directly or indirectly conducive to elimination of misery\* That knowledge which brings about final and entire cessation of all sorrows is the highest form of knowledge. Then there cannot be anything higher to know, Ily Para-Vairftgya or extreme detachment sorrows can be prevented fully and finally : that is why it is the last stage of knowledge or extreme purification ; moreover, it is absolute knowledge : there is no sense of attachment in it■ and attachment being absent, the mind will bt- placid and nothing hut knowledge **oS** the Furagaprinciplc will be there. Consequently, there will be nothing but purification of knowledge without any tinge of attachment. When the state of mind is free from the taint of propensity and of inertia, that is illumination of knowledge. By the