## **ON PRACTICE <sup>111</sup>**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

it turns its face towards its object i.e. manifests itself. In the case of one who has acquired discriminative knowledge the seeds of affliction arc singed and therefore even on the object coming before him\* they do not sprout: or become active, flow can a roasted seed germinate ? For this reason, the yog in w ho has reduced his Klesas is called proficient and is regarded as being in his last bodily frame (2). It is in such yogiris that the afflictions reach the fifth state of burnt-up seeds\* and not in others. In that state the germs of Klesa do indeed exist, but they lose their power of producing action\* and they fail to germinate even when brought face to Tace with their objects. This is the account of dormancy or the absence of germination of a ivlesa on account of its parched condition.

Now attenuation is being spoken of. Klesas get thin when they are overpowered by the contemplation of their opposites. When Klesas occasionally get suppressed but come back again they arc known as interrupted Klesas. For example\* when anger is unmanifest at the time oF attachment\* the anger is not active. Again, when attachment is directed to one object it cannot be said to be non-existent towards another object. Ghaiira being attached to one woman may not bear hatred to another. In such cases attachment is active for the present towards one and in respect or others ii can be active in the future. In respect of the others it is then cither dormant, tenuous or interrupted. That which is manifest v\ith reference to an object is called active. AH these do not fall beyond the category of afflictions. But all these fall within the category of Klesas then why this division of Klesa into dormant, attenuated, interrupted and active ? That is true no doubt, but