## **ON PitACTILt 205**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

Purtl^a, would be more inconceivable than the sixth external sense. The receiver T-sensc being Always cognised, the seer of the receiver is immutable coiisciousiu.-.^. Otherwise a fanciful thought like an mtpe revived receiver or unknown T-seuse would arise. In other words, when it is impossible for the cognition of form LJ am the kuower' to be absent, then it must be always known. The knower of constant knowledge is constant. When it is always a knower and uever an uii-kuuwer then it must be something like immutable consciousness.

For example in "1 know myself\*, T is the seer or cogniser and \* myself\ the rest of \*1', is the **unconscious** portion the Buddhi. Knowledge of objects (like colour, sound etc,) is only an interruption of the conception \*1 know myself. If the blue colour is looked at subtly through Samarihi, then it no longer continues a\* blur but becomes an atom of light which, if subtlety is carried on further, merges into an uumnuifested state, [See note *(B),* under Shtra 1-44], Thus knowledge of an object is only a relative knowledge of truth regarding it. To know it **in** its unmanifest state, *i.e.* in its state of three Qupas in equilibrium, is true knowledge. The Seer then is established in Himself\* Knowing that, to realise that the knower is the knower of self is to hnvt: complete knowledge concerning the Seer.

In the Sistras in the expression 'See the self in the self' one self refers to Buddlii and the other to the FuttiSa- Puru^a and Frak^ti being eternal this self-evident relationship of seer and seen exists. Taking only one of the entities, only Chit (conscious) or only Aeliit (unconscious) this relation,ship of seer and seen cannot be properly explained\* As tills part of the **commentary** is very difficult, so much explanation has been offered,

(3) The Ihiddhi and with others *<sup>i</sup> n* **himself.** reason for **the** other point of **difference between** Ptimftff is that as Buddhi works in association it is a means to an end, while Tunica is an end Any action, which is the result of combination of many forces, is not for any one of the forces combined\* \\ lien many forces combine to produce an action, the aCtioU^is for the out who engages them to act in unison. Buddhi and the senses with the help of many forces produce results which gjyC pleasure or pain\* The experivriCer of those results or the