## **£34 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATaFJJALI**

TVTblCb arise cruelty leading to inAictiou of injury to animals, *:\nd* malice, hatred etc\* Unless there is a feeling of cruelty behind it, if anybody's action results in the death of his parents even\* that deed is not regarded either customarily or spiritually as an act of violence. There are grades of harm, Injuring children or parents and killing ao assailant arc not the same thing, because no one can do the former unless there is intensely vile cruelty in him. The intensity of vileness marks the difference in the degree of cruelty\* That ts why killing a man and cutting grass are uo1 tlie ™ine foTm of cruelty\* Again hurting a man with rude words is not the same as killing him so much so that killing a desperado or idling trees etc. are not regarded as cruelty at all by ordinary menf because they are in such a sinful state that these acts do not contaminate them further\* This is why Maau has said that there is no harm to ordinary men in taking meal because it is their usual propensity, hut to desist from it produces excellent result.

So far for ordinary men. But for yogius observance of Ahimsa is a supreme vow ; that is why they try their best to practise haimlessness\* They first refrain from doing harm to human beiugs—even to an attacker—and then to animals by practising as little cruelty as possible even to the extent of only frightening away a snake and not killing it. Next they practise harmlcssness to vegetables. This is how yogius by practising only unavoidable harm in the mildest form go on increasing the spirit of harjnlcssiiess and ultimately through proficiency in yoga get liberated from embodied existence and thus make themselves free from harm to all creatures. Cleansing of the heart is the aim of yogic practices\*

(2) Truthfulness\* The effort to make the mind and speech correspond to the thing which has been correctly apprehended is the practice of truth. Truth which might pain another is not to be uttCTed or thought of, r.£\* to cause pain by mentioning one's defects or <sup>w</sup> ishing destruction of followers of untruth or thoughts of a similar nature.

With regard to truth, Upanigad has said, ''Truth triumphs, not falsehood1'. Tor cultivating truth, talkativeness has to be