## **2GB YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF FATAftjALI**

it is necessary to practise the above meditation, When that is mastered, exhalation ami inhalation should be done along vrlth that meditation\* feeling, as if, exhalation is being done in that void pervading the body, and that is being filled in by inhalation. In the Sastras it is stated that the exhalation and inhalation should be done in a pleasant mood. At the same time, the mind has to be made like a void. The Sastras direct that one should get one's mind engrossed into a Vacant state, *i.t.* in a vacant mind, then a sensation of touch should be felt all along the entire body, which has to be conceived as a void. In that the heart should be regarded as the centre of that sense of voidness, from which, during the process of inhalation, a sensation or Feeling is to be conceived as spreading throughout the body\*

At first, slow exhalation and normal inhalation along with meditation, have to be practised. When this is mastered, external operation should be practised now and then. That is, after exhalation breath should not be taken. Similarly, internal operation also should be practised in which it should be felt that the inhaled air spreading everywhere in the whole body has made it like a stationary pitcher filled with water, and has stopped all the unsteadiness of the body. It is needless to say, that the inhaled air goes only into the Jungs and not to other parts of the body, But after inhalation\* when the lungs are full, it is felt as if that fullness has spread over the entire body. This feeling is to be meditated upon- hor Fras&yama, this feeling over the whole body causes perfection\* and this hint should be always borne in mind. It should be understood that the true meaning of the expression "The body should be filled up with air", is ns given above.

In the beginning, external and internal operations are to be practised now .and then\* But afterwards, when they are mastered they may be practised without break. At first, in between these operations, suspension has to be practised. After the practice of normal exhalations and inhalations when there is a small quantity of air left within the lungs, the breathing should be stopped by contracting the lungs through internal effort. Due to the above practices, when one feels a Sattvik^ form of comfort within the lungs and over the entire body.