## **ON PRACTICE** m

CENTRAL LIBRARY

knowledge is of two kinds, experience or erroneous knowledge ■and correct knowledge or liberation\* Therefore both experience and emancipation arise out of conjunction, *t.t.* both the forms of awareness, *viz.* experience and liberation, are states of alliance between iTtruga au<l Prakj-iL When emancipation is complete the two arc separated.

(2} When after the realisation the Emit!}]{-principle, i.# Tsense, Euddhi is stopped once for the purpose of gelling to the Fhrusa-principle, but under the impulse of it.', latent impressions it again emerges then a cognition of discernment of the form that Pttru\$a is beyond Dltddlii and is a separate principle aristsT and that is Dsrktift or real discriminative discernment. It is the knowledge of discrimination based on the memory of the latent impressions of a closed state of the mind in which Purina is felt. Therefore the only result of such discernment **is** *<sup>A</sup>* closed state of the mind or disjunction of Pnru^a and Prakrti. The modification of the mind in the shape of experience is Adar^atm- Therefor\* when on attainment of discriminative discernment, experience ceases, Adar^ana or contrary knowledge (ir\*\ looking at Euddhi and Pum?a a^ the same—though they are separate ) also ceasecj That is the cessation of knowablcs or the isolation of Puru^a. Thus discriminatory knowledges gradually leads La Kaivalya or isolation.

(3) Kight varieties of opinion have been advanced by different authors of scriptures. The commentator has collected them here. The indications have been taken from different viewpoints. Of these the fourth alternative is the most accept' able, The eight varieties of opinion are explained below ;—

First, sway of Gu^&s *is* Adarsatiu { want of discernment }. Sway indicates prone to fluctuations. When the Gtinas are active then Adftr&aoa Continues ; only this much is true. Put it is faulty as in the example of 4lPresence of heat Indicates fever." Second, the non-production of the primary mind is Ada rsaiia. Primary mind is that which ceases to function after presenting the object of experience and discernment to tlie I,ord—the Seer. When aversion to objects of Cnjoytncut through renunciation and acquisition of discernment take place, mind ceases to function. Mind so gifted is the primary mind\* In the mind there are seeds both of gaining experience and