detachment, thereafter, that State has to be sought for' (15.3-4). And, as to that, since all things consist of the three *gunas*, there arises the impossibility of the eradication of the cause of worldly existence. Hence, it has to be shown how it can be eradicated. Besides, the purport of the scripture *Gītā* has to be summed up, and it has also to be shown that the import of all the Vedas and the Smrtis, which must be put into practice by those who long for the Goal of human life, is verily this much. Hence begin the verses, 'The duties of the Brāhmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaiśyas ...', etc.

## ाणियिवश शूाण च परतप। कमिण िवभतािन वभावभवैगु णै :॥४१॥

41. O scorcher of enemies, the duties of the Brāhmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaiśyas, as also of the Śūdras have been fully classified according to the *gunas* born from Nature.

*Parantapa*, O scorcher of enemies; *karmāni*, the duties; *brāhmana-ksatriya-viśām*, of the Brāhmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaiśyas; *ca*, as also; *śūdrānām*, of the Śūdras—the Śūdras have not been included with the others (in the compound word) because, owing to their having a single birth, [\(225\)](#page--1-0) they have no right to (the study of) the Vedas; *pravibhaktāni*, have been fully classified, have been prescribed by making distinctions among them;—according to what?—*gunah*, according to the *gunas*; *svabhāva-prabhavaih*, born from Nature.

Nature means the Prakrti of Bhagavān, His Māyā consisting of the three *gunas*. 'Born from Nature' means 'born of these (three *gunas)*.' In accordance with these the duties such as control of the internal organs, etc. of the Brāhmanas and others have been classified. Or (the meaning is): The source of the nature of the Brāhmanas is the quality of *sattva*. Similarly, the source of the nature of the Ksatriyas is *rajas*, with *sattva* as a subordinate (quality); the source of the nature of the Vaiśyas is *rajas*, with *tamas* as the subordinate (quality); the source of the nature of the Śūdras is *tamas*, with *rajas* as the subordinate (quality); for the natures of the