*Objection*: May it not be said that they are meant only for Liberation? When dedication of one's own accomplished duties to Bhagavān is conjoined with (Dhyāna-) Yog, it results only in Liberation, not in anything else. And since he has become deflected from (Dhyāna-) Yog, therefore in his case it is certainly reasonable to apprehend ruin.

*Reply*: No, because renunciation of actions has been enjoined in, 'alone, with body and mind controlled, free from expectations (and) free from acquisition,' (10) and 'firm in the vow of a celibate' (14). Moreover, in this context it cannot be imagined that during meditation there is need for help from one's wife—to deny which solitude has been enjoined. [\(68\)](#page--1-0) And the sentence, 'free from expectations, free from acquisition' (10), etc. is not applicable in the case of a householder; besides, the question of 'falling from both' becomes illogical.

*Objection*: Can it not be held that by the text, 'without depending on the results of action,' etc., renunciation and meditation are enjoined only for the men of action, and renunciation and meditation have been prohibited for one who does not keep a fire and does not perform rites and duties?

*Reply*: No, because that (verse) is meant as a eulogy of renunciation of hankering for the results of actions, which is a remote aid to Dhyāna-Yog: The one who simply does not keep a fire and is actionless is not a monk and a man of meditation. What then? Even a man of action who, for the sake of purification of the mind, performs the Yog of Karma by renouncing attachment to the results of actions may be considered a monk and a man of meditation. The man of action is thus eulogized.

Besides, it is not logical that one and the same sentence should mean an eulogy of renunciation of hankering for the results of actions and also a prohibition of the fourth stage of life (monasticism). Moreover, the Bhagavān is not prohibiting the wellknown renunciation and meditation enjoined by the Vedas, Smrtis, Purānas, Itihāsas and the scriptures on Yog for a monk who does