## **SUPERNORMAL POWERS** 30J

I CENTRAL LIBRARY*<sup>U</sup>*

tilis connection that if by nature the <sup>C</sup>tuiias ate changeable, then how can there be a cessation of the fluctuations of the mind ? The reply is that change no <lonbt takes place from the nature of the (.Tiinas but their composition as TJitddhi or the conjoint jictiotl of the Guiias, does not take place from the nature of the Gtinas alone. It results from the overseeing of the Purnyi. The overseeing arises from contact which in itself is the outcome of nescience\* When nescience ceases, the overseeing also ceases- The compositions as Rudd hi etc. also terminate at that time.

(5) basically, the real nature of an object is a collection of its Characteristics\* In the following Sutra, the maker of the aphorism has described the characteristics of an object\* A thing having relationship with past, present and future characteristics, has been called an object\* In practice an object and its characteristics arc regarded as different but fundamentally, looked at from the point of view of basic constituents where there is no past or future, a thing and its characteristics arc regarded as the same : in other words\* looked at from the viewpoints oT the Ou^ias, both are the same\* [™ essence\* there are only mtitatious. In practice, we Call it the present when we see the mutations, 'and call those which we do not see the past or the future. The basis on which the past\* present and future characteristics ate supposed to attach themselves is the real object or substratum. If gutting aside the practical outlook, we regard every kuowable object as only sentient, mutative and static principles, then there would be no past, present or future, but that would be the unmanifest condition- The real basis or substratum of everything is thus the iinmanifest {JlI-15 {'£)]. In the manifest state there is a variation in the three constituent principles. As this variation CA» be innumerable\* the characteristics would also be innumerable. That is why, the commentator says that the characteristics ate the real nature of objects, and the mutations of objects are only amplified by flieir characteristics which are the imitations in the shape of past, present or future. In reality a thing has only mutations which are designated as characteristics, symptoms and states.

(Cb A thing and its characteristics are essentially out and the same\* but in practice they are regarded as different,