CENTRAL LIBRARY

Continue *to* exist as latent impressions, the ^beneficial' ones arising atHotigat the 'harmful\* ones might gradually gather force and eventually shut out the fioiv of 'harmful' fluctuations,

(G) Fluctuations whether harmful or 'beneficial**<sup>1</sup>** give rise to latent impressions of a corresponding nature. The retention in mind of the experience of au entity is called its Saihskftra or latent impression or latency\* Therefore, from harmful fluctuations arise harmful latencies and from harmless ones arise harmless latencies. In what follows it is being shown which Vtttis arc harmful and which not. True knowledge (iJramfl.uaj like Viveka-Kbyiti and valid cognition conducive to it is free from harm while the opposite is harmful. At the time of Viveka-KhyAti or when a Nirm&jLa-Chftta (see IV-**4**) is appropriated, false knowledge (\ iparyaya) like the T-feeling that then remains and those modifications which lead to such Viveka-Khyati, *e,g.* feelings like Asmita, Riga (Attachment, passion), etc. is harmless, while the opposite is harmful. Vitalpa& induced by such statements as contribute to the acquisition of the absolute knowledge, arc harmless while their opposites are harmful.

The recollection (Smjrti) of discriminative knowledge and of those cognition^ relating to Self which lead up to such knowledge is harmless while the opposite 011c is harmful. The slumber (Nidri) which is reduced by practice of discriminative knowledge and of recollection relating to Self and which is conducive to the development of such knowledge is harmless\* whereas ordinary sleep is harmful\* The slumber before and after which the thought of Self predominates or which gets reduced in intensity by such thought and which is just enough for health during spiritual practice, is harmless sleep\*

(**7**<sup>&</sup>gt; That which is or exists is never destroyed. That is why what looks like existing in a reasonable empirical view, will as long as such outlook persists, continue to appear as existing\* All phenomenal objects are mutable\* They do not always exist ly the same form. Their material assumes different forms *e.g.* what is a clod of earth to-day becomes a pot tomorrow\* In the pot the earth is not destroyed f only the earth has changed form and is existing in the form of a pot. Thus everything ordinarily visible is existing in one form or another\* We cannot think of the total absence of anything. In this