## **6 YOGA PHTLOSOPFfV OF PATaSJALI**

pointed state of mind reveals the real nature of things. That is why if the forces of habit arising out of fundamental human weaknesses are allayed and the spring of our actions is sapped through renunciation based on correct knowledge, such renunciation becomes everlasting. Therefore, in that state the Kle£as me attenuated, and the bonds created by the latent traces of previous actions are loosened. Wlieu the ultimate truth oT all knowable things is realised, and by practice of supreme renunciation the process of knowing is set at rest by abandoning all acts and objects of knowing, then the mind is said to have reached a suppressed state. As in Sainprajfiata Yoga the ultimate reality or supreme knowledge is revealed, it is said to be leading to the Suppressed state.

How the work of revealing the true nature of things, real aud realisable, sapping the Kleias, loosening the bonds arising out of previous actions and leading to the closed state is done, can be explained as follows : Concentration givts knowledge of the Rhiitas and the Tanni&tras, Tanmdtras are devoid of pleasure, pain or stupefaction, i.r, *<sup>A</sup>* Yogin who realises Tanui&traa is not affected by the external world. Iti temporary concentration of a habitually restless nynd such knowledge is no doubt acquired but when restlessness again sets in, the mind again feels happy, unhappy or stupefied, *hi* the onepointed mind, however, such a change is not possible, as the knowledge acquired in its concentration remains firmly fixed and is not obliterated by casual disturbance. It should, therefore, be noted that though knowledge of the real nature of tilings is possible in concentration of *<sup>a</sup>* restless mind, that knowledge is not permanent as iu the case of a one-pointed mind. The same is the case with human weaknesses. Suppose one is fond of wealth. In concentration of a restless mind if cue abjures such love of wealth for the time being, it will reappear when the concentration is over ; but with a one-pointed mind such renunciation will become firmly established. Gradually with the elimination of feelings of attachment etc., actions which would have been dictated by such feelings cease altogether and thus the process leads on to a suppressed state of the mind. It should, however, be clearly **understood** that Samprajillta Yoga is not simply concentration. When