## 192 **YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAftjALl**

that before the creation of the Bhfitas, there was an all-pervading sound, which was followed by Vayu, then heat, then water,, last of all came hard K^iti. Tims from the point of view of cause it will be seen, that which has the property of sound is succeeded by that which has thermal sense\* and so on. Jn this way an object of olfactory sense is the receptacle of five properties. That which is of the gustatory sense is the receptacle of four properties except the olfactory seusr, that of visual sense is the receptacle of three properties, that of thermal sense the receptacle of two, while the receptacle of sound has only sound. At the time of the final dissolution\* the inverse process takes place and earth dissolves into water and water into heat, Atid so forth. Although in practice the Bhfitas evolve from the Akiia onwards, from the point of view' of principles, i.tf" from the point of view of basic material cause, it is not so. There Sabda Tanmatra is the cause of gross sound, Sparsa Tan m St fa is, the cause of gros.', touch and so on.

Viewed from the standpoint of sensations, the perception of smell arises from contact with the powder\* taste arises from the chemical action caused by a liquid substance. From heat comes perception of colour\* that is\* a jjprticulttr kind of heat and a particular colour are inseparably connected. Feeling of touch mainly arises from contact with gaseous matter. Our skin is surrounded on all sides by air. The sense of heat or cold **mainly** arises from the temperature of the surrounding air. With the sense of sound arises a sense of emptiness or void. Thus with the states of hardness, liquidity etc. there is a relationship with the knowledge of the Bhlitas. Hardness\* liquidity etc, however arise from difference of temperature. They arc not the flunas' principles.

Therefore considered theoretically the Bhfitas arc only mere entities of sound, touch etc. In practice however\* with those principles, their attendant features, *t.g.* hardness etc., have to be recognised. That is why when realisation of the BliutttS it, attempted through Ssnliyama, hardness etc. have to hr recognised.

The Bhfltas **or** gross **elements** like K?iti etc. arc Vi£e\$as of the **Tanmfttras** or **monads** like smell etc. The word V)£e\$n\* or the diversified\* lifts **been** used here in three senses\* first, to