## **ON CONCENTRATION**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

<sup>I</sup> is reply it ha\* to he slated that cognition of a toon-existent thing is really the cognition of existent things other than that one and is just <sup>a</sup> fVikalpa£| The absence of <sup>a</sup> thing it in reality some other positive thing and is asserted only in relation to some present thing- About the knowledge of nonexistence it has been said in &loka~VflxUaka that it is formed meutally and independently of the senses by perceiving a positive entity and then remembering that which is asserted to be absent. For example, when we do not see a pot in a plaoe, we first see a vacant and illuminated place, and then wC form an idea in the mind that the pot is absent\* In fact\* no knowledge can be formed without reference to an object\* All the knowledge that we have of things that exist is mainly of two kinds, *viz.* PraiuJlna and 'feeling'\* Of these, Pram3na relates to things which are outside the sense-organs or used as outside the sense-organs. Perception, inference and testimony —all these Pmm^as are characterised by this feature. Feeling relates to what occurs inside the sense-organs, cognition of memories, of pleasure\* etc. Realisation of something not known before is also called Prama ; its instrument is called PramAfia\* This definition of Framlpa distinguishes it from memory. In this science of Yoga\* cerTain 'feelings,' have been taken to be mental 'perceptions' and thus included in the category of Pramflna. Recollection is not, however\* mental perception because it is the feeling again of things felt before- Therefore, Pr^nana and recollection are different tilings\*

(2) Mental fluctuations vary with di[Terences in the outward objects. That is why outward tilings affect or modify <sup>t</sup> hern ind. When the mind comes into contact with an object through the sease-ebapud, then the mind is affected or changed-Kach modification of the mind-stuff is one piece of knowledge. The Chitta comes into contact with objects through -six sensc-channels. The five external senses and the sixth internal iense, called Manas, arc the channels recognised by the science of Yoga. Through the external sense-channels we get only an inchoate elementary sensation\* which is only a form *\*y.* reception. For example\* what we get through the car is only an inchoate sensation, i\*f. the cawing (of a crowj\* Then with the help of the other functions of the mind we

**Q.P.** 132—i