to (Dhyāna-) Yog, and some one has ascended to it, whereas others are neither trying to ascend nor have they ascended. May it not be said that with regard to them (the third), it is certainly logical to specify and differentiate by saying 'for one wanting to ascend' and 'for one who has ascended'?

*Reply*: No, because of the statement, 'for that person … alone'; and the use of the word '(Dhyāna-) Yog' over again in, 'when he has ascended to (Dhyāna-) Yog', amounts to asserting that, in the case of that very person who was earlier trying to ascend to Yog, inaction itself becomes a duty as a means to the fruition of Yog when he was already ascended to it. Hence, no work whatsoever becomes a duty to be followed throughout life.

This follows also from the statement about one who has fallen from Yog. [\(66\)](#page--1-0) If it be that in the sixth chapter (Dhyāna-) Yog has been ordained for a householder who is engaged in rites and duties, then, even though he were to fall from (Dhyāna-) Yog, he would still get the goal of actions, that is the results of rites and duties. This being so, the apprehension of his ruin (see 37–9) will be illogical. Since Liberation, by virtue of being eternal, is not an effect, therefore, a duty when performed, be it motivated (*kāmya*) or obligatory (*nitya*), will certainly produce its own result [\(67\)](#page--1-1) (other than Liberation). And we have said that, since the *nityakarmas* (as also the *naimittikakarmas*) are known as the authority of the Vedas, therefore they must have some result. For, otherwise, there arises the contingency of the Vedas becoming purposeless. And hence, so long as rites and duties persist, the statement about 'falling from both' does not become meaningful, for, logically there is no cause for the destruction of (the results of) rites and duties.

*Objection*: May it not be said that, since actions are performed by dedicating them to Bhagavān, therefore the results of actions do not accrue to their agent?

*Reply*: No, because it is reasonable that dedication to Bhagavān should bring in greater results (to the agent).