## **264** YOGA PHJI-OSOPHY OF PATASjALt

means the practice of PriluHySma according to time. Observation of time has to be practised by means of Japn (repetition of Mantra ). Along with this, to entertain the conception of time is not bath It is through action that we come to have the idea of time- If the mind is fixed on the flow of sound, the conception of the passage of time becomes distinct. When the mind is fixed on repeating very quickly the Pranavn ( sacred symbol OM ) the idea of a movement or flow will be felt, which is the same as experience of lime\* When this passage of time is once felt, every sound (c.£. in Auahata Nida, h\*. in the sound automatically produced within, without outside vibration or concussion) will bring the idea of time. When the sounds arc not similar they can also produce a sense of the flow of time\* i.i. the flow of time cau be marked even through the utterance of the Gayatrl mantra (a Vedic hymn), or by mentally uttering the Frauava harmoniously during the time Tcquircd for a deep inhalation and exhalation of breath. Observation of space and observation of time, have to be simultaneously practised without any conflict between the two processes.

Fran&yftma can be practised for a particular period of time, or for as long as it is possible to do ^>o. The time has to be fixed by theJapa (repetition) of a definite number of Praiiavas (sacred symbol OMj or by the number of repetition of the Giyatrl or other formulas\* The formula has to be repeated thrice. Tint in the beginning inhalation, exhalation and suspension should be practised only to the extent they appear easy of performance\* Iu order to remember the number of Pranavas repeated, the Japa has to be practised in groups. It is needless to say that mental Japa is preferable to other forms of Japa ; because the use of the digits for counting during Japa diverts the mind, Japa iu groups is somewhat as follows;—Om-Om, Om-Oin Om, Om-Om. Thus in one group, seven repetitions of Prauava are made. Repeating ns many of these groups as desired, the number ofJnpas cau get easily fixed in the mind.

There is a method of perform itig Fr3U?ayama only by suspending both the inhalation and exhalation as long as possible. In many cases, it is found to be the easier process. The time that is taken in exhaling the breath\* slowly and