## **ON PRACTICE.**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

curbed and taciturnity lias to be practised. To dispose the mind to truth, one **should** 1irst desist from imaginative literature such as fiction, drama etc. Then abandoning tibspiritual **truths,** only spiritual principles have to be contemplated on. Minds of ordinary men being always occupied with imaginary things, thoughts of spiritual principles do not get a footing there. Hence through stories and analogies they try to grasp partially the real things. Tor instance, they try to make effective the precepts of truth by incongruous example like a father telling the son, ■\*! shall break your head if yoti do not speak truth/ 1'or a yogiu practising perfection of truth, such instruction or thought does not become useful. Leaving aside all imaginary or unreal things, they engage their speech and mind tu matters of truth and established facts. Real practice of truth is difficult unless the luxury of imagination is given up. When speaking the truth is likely to harm another, silence is advisable. Untruth should not be spoken even with the best of motives, half-troth is still worse, it is conveyed by erroneous expression or innuendo.

(3) Taking a thing not given or properly not entitled to, is Steya or stealing. \* Forsaking such a thing and not even to have a desire to possess such a thing is Asteya. Kven if a jewel or treasurc-trove is found by chance it is not to be taken because it belongs to somebody else. Thus, not to take a thing which is not one's own and the effort to give up even the desire for such a thing is the practice of non-covetousness- We find in Isha Upnui^ad, ''Do not covet anybody's wealth".

(4) Brahinacharya (continence). Suppressing the sense ot" sexual organs-Restraining ail sense-organs like eyes etc. from such activities which might cause a lapse from continence and thus suppress the sense of the corresponding organ is Continence. Only restraining it is not continence. "Thinking ofi talking about\* joking, intent looking\* secret talk\* resolve, attempt and execution are the eight forms of sexual indulgence, say the sages. The seekers of salvation should practise their opposites." The abandonment oT these eight forms of nouabstinencc is continonce. Whenever thoughts of non-chastity arise in the mind, they have to be dispelled. They should