## सुखं द: ु खं भवोऽभावो भयं चाभयमेव च॥४॥ अिहसं ा समता तुितपो दानं यशोऽयश:। भवित भावा भूतान म एव पृथिवधा:॥५॥

4. Intelligence, wisdom, non-delusion, forgiveness, truth, control of the external organs, control of the internal organs, happiness, sorrow, birth, death and fear as also fearlessness;

5. Non-injury, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame, infamy—(these) different dispositions of beings spring from Me alone.

*Buddhih*, intelligence—the power of the internal organ to know of things which are subtle etc. Indeed, people talk of a man possessed of this (power) as intelligent. *Jñānam*, wisdom—knowledge of entities such as the Self etc. *Asammohah*, non-delusion proceeding with discrimination with regard to things that are to be known as they present themselves. *Ksamā*, forgiveness imperturbability of the mind of one who is abused or assaulted. *Satyam*, truth—an utterance regarding what one has seen, heard, and felt oneself, communicated as such to others for their understanding, is said to be truth. *Damah*, control of the external organs. *Śamah*, control of the internal organs. *Sukham*, happiness. *Duhkham*, sorrow. *Bhavah*, birth; and its opposite *abhāvah*, death. And *bhayam*, fear; as also its opposite *abhayam*, fearlessness. *Ahiṁsā*, non-injury—non-cruelty towards creatures. *Samatā*, equanimity. *Tusṭih*, satisfaction—the idea of sufficiency with regard to things acquired. *Tapah*, austerity—disciplining the body through control of the organs. *Dānam*, charity—distribution (of wealth) according to one's capacity. *Yaśah*, fame—renown arising from righteousness. On the contrary, *ayaśah* is infamy due to unrighteousness. (These) *prthāk-vidhah*, different; *bhāvāh*, dispositions—intelligence etc. as described; *bhūtānām*, of beings, of living beings; *bhavanti*, spring; *mattah eva*, from Me alone, [\(5\)](#page--1-0) from Bhagavān, in accordance with their actions.