the RsIs arc called the Vedas. Rsis were of two varieties— Rsfs who were protagonists tff religious rites leading to worldly happiness and those who were protagonists of the religion of detachment. Those who promulgated rituals and "saw'\* or created, i.e. who were seers or composers of Ihe Mantras to he uttered in connection with the performance of rituals were called the R\$is of the religion of attachment, which aims at happiness in (his and the next world, thus perpetualing phenomenal existence, or round ihc birth\*. Those who discovered the way to salvation and promulgated the philosophy hearing on It, were known as the Rsis of the religion of detachment or renunciation, the object of which was attainment of peace or quiescence and thus freedom from rebirth, sorrow anti suffering. Rsis like Janaka, Yidjnavalkya, etc, were of ihc latter type. Paramursi Kapiki was reputed lo he the foremost of such R\*is, Nivnti Dfrarnut or religion of detachment was flourished only in India, while Pravrtti Dhanm or religion of attachment is to be found everywhere.

The two principal features of the rules of conduct relating lo Pravrtti Dhjmia or religion of attachment **»re** fi) **the** worship of God or some saint, and (ii> charity, doing good to olhers. love and amity, and performance of other pious deeds. The goal of such religion is attainment of heaven. The main principle of Nivrtli IJharma or religion of detachment, on the other hand, is that even though performance o| religious acts may lead to heaven, residence? there is not everlasting and that it dots not bring about a cessation of the process of birth and rebirth. Attainment of correct knowledge of the fundamental truth is the only means of bringing about the cessation of such a cycle. Real Yoga or Samadhi with absolute fixity of the mind on the direct object of contemplation and complete renunciation\* are ihe only means of realising the real truth and gaining correct knowledge, i.e, of the real self. Through realisation of real truth, incorrect knowledge or misapprehension which is the cause of all **suffering,** is destroyed whereby the sorrowful process of binh and rebirth ceatfes.

Knowledge of self, again, fails into two categories, Sariikhya philosophers think of Self as absolute\* without any attribute ; while the Vedantists consider the Self to be both aiiributctess and with attributes. In all philosophies\* however. Yoga. i.e. suppression of the fluctuations of the mind through a process oF habitual practice and cultivation of the spirit of renunciation, has been advocated as the means of realising the Self and through it the attainment of perpetual peace.

Realisation of the existence of AimS—Self or Soul—as an indestructible entity or Purusa within oneself is regarded as the true knowledge of