cF external objects ; Ud:lna sustains the tissues of the **body** ; **Vylua** sustains the organs of movement of the body ; Apaua sustains the function of excrement or ■CfllTllllI<sup>3</sup> tlQIS flllfl SaillflLTBa sustains the power of assimilation\*

Mind i\* an internal organ. It forms mental resolve regarding objects- Correct imagination, *i.\*,* reception, action and retention, is resolve, wilful use of kuowable objects is resolve or volition.

The five ItJuitns, ten external organs and the mind—these sixteen are the Viiepas or diversified\*. They are not the causes of other modifications. They arc the final modifications.

(3} Undiversified s or Avi£e\$as are six in number. The five Tmitnatfft\* (monads) are tile causes of the five Rbfitas (elements) and Asm its or Ahaiiikftra or the Ego is the cause of the Tan maims and tile senses\*

The word Tnnmatra means 'that alone1 or 'that only", *i.r.* sound alone, touch alone etc., *t.g.* subtle sound (unit sense of sound), without the variation or diversity\* is known as sound Tflnm&tra. Same is the case with touch **and** other **TaumiUras.** The other epithet of Tanmatra is Paramdpu or atom. Atom does not mean minute (tangible) particles but the subtlest sensations of sound, touch etc. The subtle state intq which the different varieties of sound, touch etc. disappear, is known as Tanrufttra. The atom is such a subtle Male of sound attd similar objects. Its spatial extent cannot he clearly perceived. As a matter of fact it is conceived as constituting the flow of time. For example, when sound appears on all sides, then it is regarded as extensive but when it is meditated upon as a subtle perception within the ear, it appears only as a flow of time. In realising atoms of sound, light etc. they have to be conceived as subtle actions of the senses, and that is why they are realised like activity in a flow of time. Moreover\* they are not realised as something of great extent or a divisible entity. A body which is not divisible is known as an atomic body. Tnnm&tra is such an atomic body, No smaller hotly than an atomic body can lie goticeived. That has to be realised by a mind in deep concentration. No subtler external object can be realised even by such a mind (as ill further concentration the connection with objects is broken). The atom, as recognised in S&mkhya, is not a matter of theory alone. It is an external object that can be directly experienced.