## tfiti **YOGA PKILOSOPHY OF FATA^JAU**

object or knowable. The elements anti the senses, irf. the knows and the knowings, constitute the world of objects ; besides these there are no manifest objects. 'I'lie elements and the senses consist of the? three Gunns ; therefore, llie three Guims are the basic objects\* The difference between ubjeets, *i.t.* between Dfsya or kuowable?, and Grib y a or perceptible is this : The Dr^yas are those which are manifested by the Punija while the Grdhyas arc those which are perceived by the tbodily) senses\*

To the subject the whole world of objects appears in two ways, *i.e.* all Df£yas serve two objectives. Experience and liberation arc those two objectives. L>rsjra is used as a means either to enjoyment Of to a state transcending experience, i\*#\* liberation\* Experience implies the cognitive acceptance of the object *(*Dfsya) as desirable or us undesirable, Cognitive acceptance of the object means non-discrimination or taking the subject and the seen ft lie object) as not separate, Liberation implies realisation of the true nature of the subject, i.f. the discriminative awareness that the real 'l1 or kuower is not an object or knowable or that the subject is different from the object seen\* As this knowledge results, there remains no further objective to be served and so it is culled Apavarga or liberation or the attainment of the final goal. Then the invasion of the object ceases\* Therefore, the characteristics of the object mentioned by the maker of the Sutra are of deep significance, faultless and based ou profound knowledge of the truth.

(2) The nature of each different Gutfa is influenced by the nature of the other two Gunns. Gunns arc always known as transformed objects (as colour, pot etc\*). In each manifestation, the three Giuras are combined. When analysed it show's on out side Sattva\* on the other Tamas and Rajas in the middle\* When we speak of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are bound to be there\* So in the case of Rajas and Tamas.

Thus the Gunas are influenced by one another. Sentience is always influenced by action and retention. So are also action and retention. Take for example knowledge of sound ; its awareness aspect does not stand alone but is accompanied or tinted, so to say, by vibration and retention. So when divided into these classes as Sattva, Rajas and Tamas each is influenced bv the other two.