## *t&i* **VOCA PHILOSOPHY OF PATARjALI**

designation only indicates the relative nature. For example, sentience being predominant in knowledge it is called SAttviks\*, r.t\* compared to action it is mote Sentient. Again comparing two forms of knowledge if one is more illuminating than the other, it is called Silttvika knowledge\* If anything is called Sattvika it must be understood that it is an individual falling under a collection and that there are Rajnsika and TJiniusika individuals coming under it. The term S&ttvika indicates that it is more sentient in comparison with the other. There cannot he anything which would be purely Sattvika. The same tuI<sup>c</sup> applies to Rajasikn and Tamasika, Therefore, the three Gunns Sattva etc- are present both in .species and in individuals.

This phenomenal world can for that reason be divided as Kattvika, Rfijasikn or Timasikn, but in regard to unreal or imaginary things there cannot be such distinction. Take for example the term 'SaUft' which means state of being or existence. State is nothing but being ; so in this case there being no varieties, so scope of comparison can arise. When the idea denotes a real thing, it will be comparative according to the dominance of the Guiias\* It follows, therefore, that even though an imaginary thing may not be composed of the Gunas, the Gima-s are the material cause of all mutable real things.

(6) The Gunas constitute the basic of all knowables. The Hhfitas or elements and the senses or the instruments of reception are the mutated forms of the Gunas. Us activity on account of which it is known, is of two kinds (in that the purpose served by it is of two kinds), *oiz,* experience and emancipation from bondage. The Glip&s are the objects in their essence while the RhOtas and the senses arc the objects as evolved. The activity of the object is twofold—(1) as it results in attachment or (II) in detachment\* *trg,* attachment to objects of this world etc. and attachment to God. The result of the first is continuance of experience or the cycle of birth and death- While of the second it is release Or cessation of the Cycle.

Objectivity is the state of relationship between the subject Dra^ta and the object Djiya- When on account of nescience the subject and the object appear as of the same kind, then