centratcd upon\* viz, Samudhi on gross objects like liglu, stiund etc.. on faculties liter Ahamkdm {Rgoily) and on entities like the L\1e-feeling the individual sell These arc tailed SavTju SamAdhi (i.e. supported or assisted by an object). The highest form Of Saviju Samadhi is to be absorbed in the thought of Self, i.e.P in concentration on pure <sup>t</sup> ' At first\* of course, lire tty of mind on an object bus to be practiced : ihen it develops into Dhyana. When by practice Dhyfina becomes deeper\* it becomes Samadhi, f-Jor instance, to attain Samadhi *on* pure \*T\ an idea of pure "I" has to be formed first by ratiocination and <sup>a</sup> particular menial process ; then that idea has to be contemplated upon exclusively and developed into Dhyana. When that deepens, it will lead to complete iihsoiplioii in pine "I". When only <sup>a</sup> sense of ihc pure ilTfecling" is present and nothing else\* the Yogin is not perturbed oven by serious pain, bfo doubt such experience depends on long and con slum practice with wisdom and devotion and it is not possible without renunciation of attachment to all gross objects. When the power of Samadhi is acquired by the mind, one can l>e wholly absorbed in any object of the category of Grahya (knowahlc. I.e, phenomenal objects comprehensible by the senses), Grahana (internal and external organs) and Grahita (Ihe receiver\* the empirical self). In the early stages of practice, however, devotees are instructed by experienced teachers to lake up subjects for meditation which would bring about a blissful feeling quickly, because Dhy&lfl on objects of the senses like light, sound, etc,, does not bring about blissful feeling quickly and makes the realisation of subtle concepts like pure <sup>I</sup> or individual self, more remote.

While practising devotion and in some eases spontaneously\* people have been known to experience <sup>a</sup> feeling of blissfulness or an expansive feeling as if one were pervading the whole of space. When devotees get such a feeling as a result of devotional practice, it can be utilised as <sup>a</sup> support for Dharana (fixity), which in course of time cEin he developed into Dhyana (meditation). If one occasionally gels such <sup>a</sup> feeling spontaneously, i.e. without any practice, but cannot get it when he desires it, then it is oT no use for purposes of Yoga, Again, the coming of such a feeling does not necessarily mean that liharana (fixity of thought). Dhyana (meditation) ' and SamSdhi (intense concentration) have been attained; because liven on getting such a blissful feeling or a feeling of pervading space, such minds continue to rove in many directions and arc nm occupied with onlv one idea It cannot therefore come within the definition of Yoga That feeling may be <sup>a</sup> sort of realisation and if fixity is developed on the feeling itself (hen it might lead to (he practice of Yoga.