## **eo YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAftjAl\*!**

## **Sickacsn, Incompetence, Doubt, Dcluiion, Sloth, Non-Abst^ntiwo Erroneous Conception, NoD-Atlainment Of Any Yogic Stag\*,. And Instability To Stay In A Yogic State, These Distractions Of The Mind Are The Impediments, 30.**

These nine obstacles cause distraction of the mind. They arise with the fluctuations of the mind. In their absence, the fluctuations do not arise. Sickness is disorder of the humours, secretions and the organs of the body. Incompetence or listlcssncss is incapacity of the mind\* Doubt is a kind of thinking touching on both sides, such as £Tt can be this or it cannot be this'. Delusion is not thinking of the processes for concentration. Sloth is disinclination arising out of heaviness oT the budy anti the mind. Non-abstention arises out of thirst for or addiction to worldly objects. Erroneous conception is false knowledge. Non-attainment of any (Yogie) stage referred to, relates to the stage of preparation of the mind for concentration. Inability^ to remain in a state rclaLes to failure to maintain the attained state. When concentration is obtained\* the mindstuff is no longer disturbed. These nine kinds of disturbance are called blemishes of Yoga, foes of Yoga, or obstacles to Yoga (1).

**(1) Destruction of the obstruction anti the mind being fully reposed are tlie same thing. When the body ails\* effort to Yoga or concentration cannot be made fully\* Bodily disturbance and illness should be removed by wholesome and measured diet taken only after the previously taken food is digested. This is thy sure way of tilling illness. By special devotion to Godt refinement and good sense will come which will prompt the Yogin to take good and limited quantity of food at proper interval and he will take proper care of his health, so that he will never lose judgment. Iuspite of a good sense of duty, when on account of restlessness the mind cannot be engaged or kept in devotional work like contemplation etc. that is**