*Vedāntin*: No, since it is unreasonable that, when Knowledge which results in Liberation is attained, there can remain a hankering for results of actions. Just as there is no desire for an action or its result [\(254\)](#page--1-0) in connection with a well, pond, etc. when there is a flood all around, similarly when Knowledge which has Liberation for its result is attained there can be no possibility of hankering for any other result or any action which leads to it. Indeed, when somebody is engaged in actions aimed at winning a kingdom, there can be no possibility of his engaging in any activity for securing a piece of land, or having a longing for it!

Hence, action does not constitute the means to the highest good. Nor do Knowledge and action in combination. Further, Knowledge which has Liberation as its result can have no dependence on the assistance of action, because, being the remover of ignorance, it is opposed (to action). Verily, darkness cannot be the dispeller of darkness. Therefore, Knowledge alone is the means to the highest good.

*Objection*: Not so, because from non-performance of *nityakarmas* one incurs sin. Besides, freedom (of the Self) is eternal. As for the view that Liberation is attainable through Knowledge alone, it is wrong. For, if *nityakarmas [\(255\)](#page--1-1)* which are prescribed by the Vedas are not performed, then one will incur evil in the form of going to hell, etc.

*Counter-objection*: If this be so, then, since Liberation cannot come from action, will there not arise the contingency of there being no Liberation at all?

*Pseudo-Vedāntin*: Not so, for Liberation is eternal. As a result of performing *nityakarmas* there will not be incurring of evil, and as a result of not doing any prohibited action (*nisiddha-karma*) there will not be any possibility of birth in an undesirable body; from relinquishing actions meant for desired results (*kāmya-karmas*) there will be no possibility of being born in some desirable body. Since there is no cause to produce another body when the present body falls after the results of actions that produced this body get