## CENTRAL LIBRARY

## INTRODUCTORY

## *fntffan Philosophy of Sdvation*

**In the absence oT definite data, the language of a book is generally taken us a. guide m determining its age. Though a precise dale cannot be fixed, the language of the Vedas and of the different Indian philosophies helps ns to form an estimate L>f the age of the different treatises. This, however, is not an infallible guide, as many later treatises were framed in the language of the old, while many later productions were interpolated into old treatises by subsequent writers. For example, in the Vedas several vaiLelies of language are noticeable in the Mantras and the Brahmanas. In respect of authors, no precise COCIcUlStOCI C<m be arrived at from the names, t here has certainly been more than one person of the name of Vyasa or Y5jfiavulkya. Similarly, there has been more than one philosophet of the name of Patafljali. Tlte name Patafijali seems Eo he a family surname as we come across it in different trealises dealing with different "subjects emanaiing from different regions of India. Wc do not propose to discuss here <sup>I</sup> he relative ages of the different philosophies of India but shall only confine ourselves lo the examination of <sup>I</sup> he different religious viewpoints prevalent in India, with reference especially to the evolution, development anti influence of the philosophy of salvation in India.** *\**

Hit correct name of Hindu religion is Arsa religion or the religion of the Rsis, Arsa religion is that which is not contrary Eo the teachings of ifte Vedas and that is known as true religion and nothing else, Buddhists **also** called **the** original Hindu **Religion "1** si-mat"' or **\*'Rsj**triiit" or opinion of the Reis. The Vedas which are the basis of the Hindu religion arc also based on the words of the Rsis. The seers or composers of the Mantras of the Vedas were Rsis. These Rsis were not considered ordinary men. Tht&b who had uncommon spiritual attainments were regarded as Rsis. rhe **term** \*'Ryis'' was used in **ancient limes** in a reverential sense. Thai is why the Buddhists called Buddha "Mahesi" or "Mahar\$i^" As **<sup>a</sup>** result, in that period men endowed with supernormal knowledge and powers were regarded as Rsis. Even **women** and **non**-Brahmin3 endowed with such powrers were regarded as Rais. The Scriptures "seen'" or uttered, <sup>i</sup> e, revealed by