CENTRAL LIBRARY

on watching what your mind is receiving- This is the chief means of cleansing your mind or attaining self-purification. This is the best form of Smj-ti-Sadhana\*

Without Smrti-Sadliana the ultimate object of contemplation cun not be realised. This cultivation of memory can he practised in the midst of all actions\* even while walking\* sitting or lying down. When we art- engaged in work, we can keep in mind the object of spiritual contemplation and if we carefully notice that it is never absent from the mi ml, the method is called working in *<sup>A</sup>* Yogic state\*

In Smrti-Sftdhana we must always watch what is rising in tilt mind, and abandoning the disturbed state must keep before the mfnd\*S eye a vacant, i.\*. volitionless state of the mind. That is the correct way of purifying the mind and attaining tranquil knowledge. When the memory becomes firtn and self-forgetfulness disappears altogether, then the SaniAdhi that ensues from being engrossed in self otily7 is real Sam]majnfttn-Yoga\*

For purposes of developing and preserving memory, careful practice is necessary. When through practice, carefulness, **becomes** habitual, then is memory preserved. In the Buddhist method **prominence** lias also been given to memory (Smrti)\* There also it is said that withouL memory and its careful development, mind cannot be shut wilfully. In BodhicliaryAvatara it has been said that watchful observation of the state of the !>ody and **the** mind ill which they might be at different times is Samprajanyu, This kills self-forgetfulness, reveals the slightest fluctuation of the mind and gives the power to stop such fluctuation, it thus gives the ability to concentrate on principles, especially the spiritual principles. It might bc questioned that this habit of watching the. different fluctuations of the mind is not one-pointedness but multi-pointedness. In reply it can be said that though in respect of the knowable it is multi-pointed, *in* respect of the instrument of reception it is one-pointed, because the intellect is then occupied with one thought only, Pit. *fti* shall be mindful and shall remain mindful/' This one-pointedness is the principal onc-poi nitdiiess\* and on its success the achievement of nnc-poitiU-dness in respect of the knowables also becomes easy\* By getting ode-