## l&a **YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAXJALl**

(IJ The comparison with the magnet means that although Puru\$a undergoes no change and does not come into contact with the knowable, the object ( kuowable ) on account of its proximity to the Purina becomes cognisable. Proximity here does not indicate spatial nearness\* but tt is proximity as in the notion of the relation between the property (knowable) and the proprietor ( knower ) he. the sort of notion implied by the words fi am the knower of it\ In this statement or kuowable is seen or understood by feeling or being object of action. The object of action and feeling is of three kinds :—The perceptible, the usable (i.f. property of being used), and the retentive. The usable objects are those of the organs of action, they art- tangible actions, Retentiveness is in the action of the l'ra^as and the latent impressions. They are intangible action and indistinct feeling. Active and retentive objects also are felt. Perceptible objects are directly apprehended. It is cognised that the knower of these notions is T. That cognition is Eurirfhi, \*3 know also that I am the knower of objects'. The target of this last T of JI am the knower1 is the pure Seer which is the re Hector of the Buddhi or the empiric ego (vide 1-7).

The nature of the union ( correlation ) is being clearly slated here. That there is contact between the Iseer and the seen is a fact and is a common experience. Therefore I-sense is the point of contact between the knower and the knowable.

Now the character of this union has to be understood. Kor that, the various kinds of union and their symptoms have to be knowm. When more than one separate thing is understood as not separate or without any gap between them, they are said to be united. Contact or union may be of three kinds *viz.* spatial, temporal, or tindistinguished by either of them.

Kxtcrnal objects situated without any gap represent spatial union. It is not necessary to give any example of this. The contact of notion\* that exi\*t only in time t.^ which appear and disappear in time, or what extends over both ^time and space is known as union in time, for example the contact of the feeling of happiness etc. and knowledge. Knowledge is a state of the mind, happiness is also a state of the mind. Because it is not possible for knowledge and the feeling of happiness to be present or felt at the saule time, they are really perceived one after the