the Self, Some consider this entity or Purusa to be endowed with aitri' billet at certain stages. while others think, ihat it is always an aUributeles\* impersonal witness and ilhiminer, The JvSrhkhya view is of the latter type. According to S&riikhya philosophy Atman or Soul or Puru^a is many in number. It holds ihm die Soul is attrihutcless in itself. while according to the purity or otherwise of the mind of an embodied Soulr it seems lo become godly or the reverse.

Reviewing the emergence of these two different conceptions ii would appear that at first <sup>I</sup> he soul was regarded as an entity with function and attributes. Rituals and sacrifices appertained to the worship associated with such a Saguna Atman or a Soul with attribute. Rsi Kapila was the first to discover the knowledge of the Nirguna or atiribuLCless Self. <sup>I</sup> hat know ledge gradually spread amongst the Rsts and ultimately found its way into the Upanif&ds, This is prC'Cminently noticeable in the Kathopanisnd Wc thus see that first came the rituals, then the knowledge of the Soul with attributes, after which came [he knowledge of the aiirihutclcss Soul Such was the cvoluiion of knowledge of the Self.

Turning now to the development of the philosophy of Self, we find that in the age of the Rsis, Panchaxikha framed the Sariikhva aphorisms according to the instructions left by R^i Kapila. Although the treatise produced by Pafichasikha is not in existence in its entirety, the little that is available gives us an idea of the Sarnkhya philosophy. In Sarilkhyu Karika composed *by* **IswarakrMia** ah the fragments then available of Sariikhya philosophy were collected and preserved- The later product, viz. S&mkhya Pnavachna Sutra In sis chapters, iikhough variously transmuted, is commonly known as the Saritkhya philosophy. In addition to these, there as a very shoFl collection of aphorisms known as Tacvva Samasa. which chough regarded by Mime as very ancient is not really so.

In ancient India, amongst the seekers of spiritual salvation, (here were two distinct sets, one **known** as the Samkhya sect and the other as the Yoga sect. When the **philosophy** dealing with knowledge of Self with its attributes was propounded the Yogi) or the method to be followed for its realisation was also enunciated, because no knowledge of the Self is attainable without conception, contemplation, and Samadhi (intense concentration)■ When the knowledge of (he attribute]ess Self was discovered, Yoga for (he attainment of such knowledge was also framed accordingly. From FUi KapiJa came the knowledge of the pure unconditioned Soul, as well as the method of rcalisaiion of the conception of such <sup>a</sup> Self. That Is why in the ancient philosophies of India there are countless exhortations for regarding Satiikliya and Yoga as

th—O.P, 135

CENTRAL LIBRARY