## **ON practice tEl>**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

**The** general **rule** mentioned before that touch arista out of an object having: the quality of sound, and from an object having tin property of touch arises colour, and From an object having the property of colour arises taste\* and from taste arises smell, is not applicable in respect of Tanmatras. Tantnltras have emanated from the ego. The perception of smell arises with the help of minute panicles. Therefore that which produces the perception of smell Tanmfltra can also **produce perception** of taste, colour\* touch anti sound ? Tims the sound <sup>l</sup> auniatra ]ir. been said to have one quality, touch two qualities, colour three qualities, taste four qualities and smell five qualities. **Naturally** however at the Lime of realisation\* each TanmMra is realised by its peculiar property.

(4) Asmitfi (Ego)—'['-sense\* *i.t.* the pretentious feeling relating to self. The word 'Asmitif refers also to the knowledge having T as its determi naudum. Here it means Ego. It has been said before (11-6) that identity of the instrument of reception with Supreme consciousness is A-smita. From that point of view liuddhi is pure Asmitfi or final form of Egoism. In every case, however\* AsmiUVmatra is not Mahat. In the present context it is the common constituent of the six sense-organs, the common Ego. Ego or mutittive\*rl'-feeling which is the common constituent of all seuses and ttuddhi, both are called Asmita-m&tra\* When the term 'Asmlti-mfttra\* is used it refers only to Mahat or pure T-sense,

The relationship of other sense-organs with the Self is also due to Asmitfl, which produce\* the conception am endowed with the power of hearing1 etc, Thus the combination of the T-sense with the instruments of **reception creates** T-feeling which is Ego. Ill fact\* the senses are only the different states or modifications of AsiniUi\* From external appearance the seats of the different senses appear as particular arrangements of the Bhutas. The internal energy by which the Bhiitas are arranged in a peculiar u^anner is really a sense. Internal sense energy is in fact a particular form of the T'-sense or Ego. Ou aecovtnt of the presence oTego, the whole body is conceived as \*1', The seiisv organs, the organs of action, Pr&pa and Cliitta or mind art different states or mutated forms of Ego. For example\* eye~ T-sense inherent in the eyer *L\*.* ego taking the form of the eye.