## **230 YOKA PHILOSOPHY OF PATASjAI.J**

true knowledge- Through them directly impurities in the shape of delusive Jatt-ucies, are removed which lead to the dawn of insights\*

Impurities mean not only wrong knowledge but also action under it\* influence and the latent impressions collected therefrom. Observance of Yogic practices implies action based on such knowledge\* which leads to development of correct apprehension\* This again destroys ignorance, which brings complete cessation of the activities of Buddhi and then isolation is attained\* This is how Yogic practices are the causes of emancipation.

Some people get upset to hear that knowledge can accrue from Yoga. They say that practice can never be the cause of knowledge which, they say, can be derived only through direct perception, inference and from accredited teachers. This proposition is not disputed by Yogius also. It has been shown above how yogic practices contribute to knowledge. Iti fact, Samadhi is the best form of direct perception, and the reasoning that follows, therefrom culminates in discriminative knowledge, while the knowledge concerning Mole fa or liberation imparted by an accredited teacher who has attained realisation is thcpurest **A**gama (or teaching from a preceptor}\*

Practice of yoga i-^ the cause of wisdom. The commontatot has clearly explained before that the material cause is riot the only cause\* In fact, Mok^a (liberation, emancipation) has no material cause. Bondage means union between the Gmias and the PuTiisa. The union between uou-dpatial Purn^a and Prakj'ti is not like the union of two external objects, which implies contiguous existence\* Their contact is only the undifferentiated notion of them. That conception of non-separation is destroyed by discrimination\* Yoga is the menus of removal of impurities and attainment of **discrimination.** Discrimination destroys indiscrimination\* This is how Yoga is the cause of emancipation\* Ju&t as there can be no material cause for the Union (of Puru?a and Prakrti), so there cannot be any material cause for separation (\*V. of Mok\$a or disunion from misery).