## **ON FRACriUK**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

**and comparatively little activity, pleasurable sensation does not arista Pleasure and pain, sentience and activity are comparative stales. Reeling of bodily comfort means the foditig arising out of the normal working of the system\* while uneasiness arises from Overstimulation through Foreign causes. When mental action in the shape of desire is normal it gives pleasure but when it is too much it causes pain, Again when on getting <sup>a</sup> wislial'for object desire is satisfied (ia overaction of the mind ceases)\* pleasure is derived. In stupor\* in ft state in which there is no sensation of pleasure or pain\* there is very little activity but sentience is indistinct. In comparison with that, there is more sentience in pleasure. Therefore\* quieter sentient state (Sattva) is inseparable from pleasure while active state or Kajas is associated with pain—mental or physical. When Sattva is overcome by Rajas, pain is felt. That is why the commentator has spoken of Sattva as the object to be heated and Rajas as the heater- Pimi\$a who is beyond the reach of heating is the impartial observer of heat as well as absence of heat—an absolute Seer. When Saliva is heated or influenced by overactivity the witness thereof—the Piiru^a—appears also as heated. Similarly, when there is excess of Sattva, lie appears as full of bliss. Hut that .sort of transformed appearance is not real. That Js only an imputed characteristic. In realityk by the action of heat (of Rajas), Sattva is modified or altered. Impartial witnessing of the modifications is Pnruga's experiencing the thing presented.**

**tbt;> riti rpn: tTTWraTTIiClfWTJn: VTTTlwW \*rlT?TVtm^raTTTlqTf^STrT^\* tt^tqTT^FTfir ?^SttI«fiW^rsIJrwwfTOHn\*\*Jwr3ni^!IT^3'«3nirftw«rfw trrf?f5i: ti<ru?iflfaqKTt ^ ^nqt?¥TTfa\*r qtn^i-rrfrfnr^qi.**