one divine Being is hidden in all beings; He is omnipresent, the indwelling Self of all beings, the Supervisor of actions, the refuge of all beings, the witness, the one who imparts consciousness, unconditioned [\(137\)](#page--1-0) and without qualities' (Śv. 6.11).

*Anena hetunā*, owing to this reason—because of this presiding over; O son of Kuntī, the *jagat*, world, with the moving and the nonmoving things, consisting of the manifest and the unmanifest; *viparivartate*, revolves, under all conditions. [\(138\)](#page--1-1) All the activities of the world in the form, 'I eat this; I see; I hear this; I experience this happiness, suffer this sorrow; I shall do this for that purpose, [\(139\)](#page--1-2) I shall do this for this purpose; I shall know this,' etc. indeed arise owing to their being the objects of the conscious witness. They verily exist in consciousness, and end in consciousness. And such *mantras* as, 'He who is the witness of this is in the supreme heaven' [\(140\)](#page--1-3) (rg., Nā. Sū. 10.129.7; Tai. Br.2.8.9), reveal this fact. Since it follows from this that there is no other conscious being apart from the one Deity—who is the witness of all as the absolute Consciousness, and who in reality has no contact with any kind of enjoyment—, therefore there is no other enjoyer. Hence, in this context, the question, 'For what purpose is this creation?', and its answer are baseless—in accordance with the Vedic text, 'Who know (It) truly, who can fully speak about this here? From where has this come? From where is this variegated creation?' (rg. 3.54.5; 10.129.6). And it has been pointed out by the Bhagavān also: 'Knowledge remains covered by ignorance. Thereby the creatures become deluded' (5.15).

## अवजानित म मूढा मानुषॴ तनुमाितम्। परं भावमजानतो मम भूतमहेरम्॥११॥

11. Not knowing My supreme nature as the Bhagavān of all beings, foolish people disregard Me who have taken a human body.

*Ajānantah*, not knowing; *mama*, My; *param*, supreme; *bhāvam*, nature—My supreme Reality, which is like space, nay, which is subtler and more pervasive than space; as *bhūta-maheśwaram*, the