## **ON PRACTICE 1SQ**

CENTRAL LIBRARY

the elements). They are the diversified varieties of the undiversified Sabda Tanmatra (sound monad), Sparsa Tanmatra (thermal monad), Riipa Tanmatra (ligliL monad), Rasa Tanmatra (taste monad) and Gandha anmatra (smell monad) (2). Similarly the five sense-organs, the auditory, tactual, visual, gustatory and olfactory, the five organs or action, the vocal, manual, locomotive, cxcrcmental and procreative, and mind or the eleventh sense, which works as organ of perception as well as of sense, are the diversified formations of the undiversified (dynamic) Ego. These are the sixteen diversified productions of the Gunai. Tlnj undiversified arc six in number (3)T *viz\** Sabda Tanmatra, Sparsa Tanmatra, Rupa Tanmatra\* Rasa Tanmatra anti Gandha Tanmatra which have respectively one, two, three, four and five characteristics, while the sixth one is (dynamic) Ego (4).. These six are the six undiversified mutations of the pure T -sensc which is just the awareness as existence (5). The token T+-scnse—Ego—is above these six. These on diversities reach the last stage of their development reaching the Lmga-matra (token only) state of Mahai and when disappearing after staying in Mahat they merge into Pradhana (6) (Prakrti) which is neither existing nor non-existing\* neither real nor unreal, *t.e.* not a fiction, is unmanifested and Alinga (or never functions as a token). The mutations of the undi versified <sup>s</sup> referred to before are token reductions, while further mutation into a state where it is, but does not exist, is a change into Alinga, nontoken type or unmanifest state. This state has not Purqpartha as its cause, because being an object of the Purusa cannot be the primal cause of the unmanifest nor has it been caused for serving ends of the Purusa. It is moreover regarded as eternal (")■ In the particularised or phenomenal states [diversities.