## *22* **YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAWJALI**

inherent in the internal organs. The following examples will make the idea clear. You see an elephant. The eyes only see a black mass ; its other properties are not known by the eves. Knowledge about its power of carrying loads, its power of movement, its mode of life, its toughness, its roar had been gathered before by vout appropriate sense-organs and retained in the mind. When the elephant is seen, the internal power,, or Chitta, mixes all the fragments of knowledge and creates the complete idea that it is all elephant- If on seeing an elephant you feel pleasure, that also is an action of the Chitta or mind-stuff. It is only a reappearance of the feeling of pleasure which you experienced before.

By its movements or fluctuations the existence of the mind is felt *\*T* the absence of fluctuations can only mean the lapse of the Chitta. The modifications of the mind can be divided into several main heads according to the three constituent principles or Gulias. Out of them only the principal controllable ones have been mentioned by the maker of the Sutras as being five in number so far as Yogic practice is concerned^ All students of this science should particularly remember tliefollowing points, regarding Chitta: Chitta'or the mind is the internal organ with three functions, cognition, conation, and retention. The first two are knowing and willing while retention is the subliminal or latent impression. The feeling or impression of things seen, of things retained in the mind (as memory), of things willed, of pleasure or pain acutely fell, are modifications of the mind, known as Fratyayas. Conation or willing being a cognised or conscious function is also of the nature of Fratyaya- Samsh^rns or latent or subliminal impressions arc unconscious functions. Thus mind has two properties\* pi£, Fratyaya anti SaiiiskRra. Of these. Pratyaya is called Chitta-Vrtti or the modification of the mind. In this >,cit;Ttco the fluctuations or modifications taken collectively arc ordinarily known as the Chitta or^tmtid. Because the fluctuations are of the nature of knowledge, they are the transformations of Buddhi which is the transformation of Sattva. That is why Chitta and Buddhi have been used indifferently in many places. That Buddhi or intellect is not the Buddhi as a Tattvn\* Similarly, \*C hitta-Vrtti\* or