## IS2 **YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATaSJALT**

**the division is based on the peculiarities of the different stales\* As they are countered by contrary meditation, so arc they manifested by favouring causes\* All Klesas are but varieties of nescience, because all of them are permeated by error\* When an object is coloured by nescience, it is followed by the other Klesas (3), They arc felt whenever there is nescience and they dwindle away when nescience is thinned away\***

(1) The four forms of Kle^a like Asmit£ etc\* are really variations of Avidya. The Kle£as like Asmita etc. have four states viz. dormantj attenuated, interrupted or active. Prnsupti or dormancy is existence in the form of germ or latent power\* A dormant affliction rises again when it gets an occasion\* At&uu or attenuated Klcsn is one that is thinned by Kriyayoga. Avichchiuna or interrupted Klesa is that which is suppressed by other Kleias. Udara means active. At the time of anger antipathy is in operation and attachment is in abeyance. When by the practice of detachment, attachment is controlled then it is called 'attenuated'. Existence in a latent state is dormancy\* Untraceable or unseen latencies though not bearing fruit at one time might become fruitful later. Hence they are regarded as dormant. The state of Kleia means <sup>n</sup> state when an afflictive mental modification is in operation.

A dormant Kdesa is somewhat like a Klesa which has become like *A* parched seed\* because both are unnoticeable. The dormant Kleiia however shows itself whenever it gets an occasion while the Klc£a which has become like a parched seed will not appear even when there is the occasion. That is why the commentator has called the latter the fifth state of affliction. It is in reality entirely different from the four States mentioned before. As a burnt seed does not sprout again*<sup>t</sup>* so that Atman is not affected by Kle£as burnt in the fire of knowledge. \*

(2) When the Klesa becomes like a parched seed, then a vogin becomes Jivan-Mukta liberated though alive). Such a yogiu becomes free by subjugating the Chitta and that is why his present body becomes his last one as lie is uot born again.