was prepared by Vyfisa who was different from Kr^na Dwaipayana Vyasa the author of the Mahabh&rata. In fact there have been many Vyisas and the commentaries written by them embrace inany ancient philosophies of India. The extant treatise on S&mkftyu-Yoga philosophy might he of comparatively receni origin hut the philosophy itself is the most ancient. As its wisdom is profound, its logic clear and its foundation free from any trace of Mind faith, so are the rules of conduct prescribed [herein. There cannot he any nobler conduct lhan truth\* Ahiriisa etc., nor thought purer than amity or kindness. Buddhists adopted these in (heir entirety. From the life of Buddha it appears that before he went to t'ruvilva for devotional contemplation he studied Saiiikhyn philosophy for some years with Adara Muni, a noted Samkhya philosopher of Ins time. The climax ol Samkhya practice is Sumddhi. Buddha also practised Samadhi in consonance with die Suriikhya-Yoga system through Asana. Pr&nuyama, elc. Sarhkhyit"Yoga practice consists in being absorbed in Dllyulia suppressing all passion\* anger, fear\* sleep and even breathing. Buddha Followed exactly this process in his devotional practice. We come across reference to Yoga philosophy in Kautilya's Arthasastra which is the most ancient trealise on economies and finance in India. It is also believed thal medical science amongst ihc ancient Hindus was founded on the knowledge of the three constituent principles, viz, Sattva, Rajas and Tanias of \*the Samkhyu philosophers. To those ancient sages, therefore, is India indebted alike for spiritual enlightenment as for material knowledge, hi fact, olhcr philosophies dealing with

Wc shall conclude ibis short introduction b> Stating categorically the fundamental principles of Samkhya philosophy. They am briefly — *{])* The cessation of the threefold misery is Moksa or salvation, fii) In the Mok\$a state fi.e. on attainment of Salvation) one realises one's true nature which js an immutable and am ibuieless consciousness (life) In Moksa, the China (Mind) ceases to function, fiv) The way to bring about such cessation is renunciation and wisdom acquired **through** Samadhi. (v) The means rtf attaining Samadhi fs observance of the prescribed rules of conduct and the practice of the defined methods of meditation and concent ration, e.g. Dliyann etc. (iv) **Moksa** brings about a cessation of the c^rcte of birth, death and rebirth, ifvii) Ordinarily such a cycle is eternal, as it is the result of eternal latent impressions of Karma (both physical and mental actions) done in countless births, (viii) Prakrit and many Purti\$as **are** the **constituent** and efficient Causes, (is) Prakrits and Purusa are eternal uncreated entities. <sup>I</sup> vl Isvara *h* an eternally emancipated Puru^a. l\*il He docs not create the world or

spiritual salvation are based on Sitrirkhya-Yoga Philosophy.

CENTRAL LIBRARY