## **mci YOGA PHII-OSOPHY OK PATANJALJ**

**be engrossed** *in* **it and appears to take on its .nature (3). The mind set on subtle elements and being engrossed in them is coloured by the nature of such subtle elements, while a mind absorbed in gross elements is coloured by their gross nature. Similarly the mind engaged with the various things of the world gets engrossed in such distinctions and becomes the reflector thereof. The same thing is noticeable in respect of the instruments of cognition\*** *viz-* **the senses. When the mind concentrates on the instruments of reception then it becomes occupied and tinged by them. When the mind is set thinking exclusively of the cogniser, it becomes engrossed in it and gels tinged with the nature of the cogniser— Grahita, Likewise when the mind is occupied with the thought of a liberated soul\* the mind displays the nature of such a liberated soul. This sort of resting of the mind in and its shaping after the receiver\* the instrument of reception and the object received,** *viz***. the Grahita (Empiric Self), the senses, 'and the elements, like a crystal is called Samapatti or engrossment.**

**(1) Set mind—one-pointed mind. When by practising the method of l£vara~pra^iidti&na etc. the mind gets habituated in resting tranquilly oo the desired object, then tile mind is said to be set. The concentration attained in a aet mind is culled the engrossment of SamApatti\* That is its difference front simple concentration. The knowledge acquired in such it slate of engrossment is Samprajflita or complete knowledge or Samprajfilta Yoga or concentration which gives complete and sustained knowledge. Buddhists also use the word fSfnnlpattir blit in a different sense.**

**(2) The maker of the Sutras has described \*in this and the following SQtras the different kinds of engrossed mind there are and there may be.**

**Engrossment may be of three kinds according Lo the nature of the subjects contemplated upon—relating to the cogniser.**