## **26 YOGA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAfjJ AM**

**ascertain that it is the voice of the crow. This complete knowledge is mental perception\***

In the perception of mental objects, we get the adequate knowledge of cognition, i.r. by taking in the feeling existing in the .senses we get a knowledge of it- The sensation of pleasure etc. is inchoate mental knowledge. The Tull knowledge thereof which follows is the adequate knowledge of a mental object. Like the action of external senses, the mind receives the impressions first *mf* next when the mind-stuff is affected thereby, then mental perception takes place. Thus in all mental perceptions, reception comes first and then comes the full perception. Therefore, the sure awareness of a thing outside the sensesis Pram&na- This definition *is* applicable to all direct perceptions\*

(3) The feature and form of external objects arc called their ViSe^a (speciality). Every object has its peculiar properties of sound\* touch, etc, different from those possessed by others \* they are called their feature (Miirti) while Vyavadhi is their specialform. Take the case of a piece of brick. Its colour and shape cannot be exactly described by howsoever large a number of words we may use ; Ijut when we see it we can at once have the exactcognition. That is why direct apprehension mainly relates to Vise^a, i.e\* form and feature. The word 'mainly' lias been used to imply that some awareness of the general features is present therein\* though knowledge of the special properties and features predominates\* That which is present iti many things is called S&m&nya or generality. Words like fire, water, etc\* are used in a general sense- Op account of nature and shape, fire may be many, but their general name is 'fireT. Existence is a common feature of all things\* In direct apprehension knowledge of sitcli general features is also present in a modified form. Jn the following instances of inference and verbal communication, however\* the awareness is only of the general features, because they arc established by words, signs, etc. It cannot be said that in the case of \*Chaitra ( the name of a person ) exists'—a case established by inference or verbal communication we have an instance of the knowledge of a particular object ; because if Cliaitra had been seen before, the mention of the