## ON PRACTICE. *211*

CENTRAL LIBRARY

FnniQEL who has not attained proficiency lias for the same reason remained eternally allied to the beginniugless knowablt. It cannot be that there was *a* Lime before, when there was no alliance between the Seer and the seen and that it has taken place at a particular time. In such a Case how will the Cause for the alliance arise ? It will be explained later that the cause of this alliance is Avidya or wrong knowledge. Wrong conception begets wrong knowledge. So the chain of misconception is beginningless. This has been very cogently described in the aphorism of Ikiiichasikha quoted above. The primordial causes are the three **G-u**naS> As they have hecti allied with the Puru^k from time without beginning their modifications in the shape of Jtuddhi, the instruments and their objects like sight\* sound etc. are also eternally allied to the Puru^a,

Plurality of Purina and the unit nature of Pradh&ilft {collective name of the three Gunas) have been referred to in this aphorism (see 11-23 and iV-16). On this point V^chaspati Mi&tfa says, "Furu^a. is not oiw like Prad liana. Ill altitude of **Piirii\$ast** births and deaths, experiences of pleasure and pain\* liberation and bondage\* from all these\* plurality of Furn\$rt is established, as it is logical to assume that the simultaneous knower of many things must he many in number. The Sruti which {apparently) advances the oneness of Puru^a is contradicted hy other evidences. As the Seers cannot bt divided by time and space, being beyond time and space\* devoted persons urge that it is not proper to imagine that one Seer is present here and another St-er at another place, and that is why they say that the Seer is one". In reality the iSruti does not mention the oneness of the supreme Seer\* but only refers to the **oneness** of the soul of the Universe—the Creator, the Protector and Destroyer, the Sagtma Isvara. In Mahibhftrata also it is said, "At the time of creation He creates, and at the time of destruction **He** eats **it up** again. Destroying everything and withdrawing all into Himself, the soul of the Universe lies in water, *i.e,* in homogeneous primordial cause'\*. In Ssruti this soul **of** Creation has been called one. He is not pure Awareness or Atimt, The unity of Frakrtf and plurality of Pnru\$a have been established directly by the &ruli as in the kvet^lvatara Cpanifad : «Otie Purnsa without birth (i>, eternal) enjoys or experiences