## **ON PRACTICE** m

CENTRAL LIBRARY

**(2) The expression 'Revealed as another' means that the knowahle is cognised as of a nature different from its own, ofthe nature which is consciousness,** *hi* **reality\* <sup>a</sup> knowable is by nature mirevealed. It is revealed by contact with pure consciousness. A knowabit object is revealed only by consciousness itself. The position has to be clearly understood. If the sun is partially covered by an opaque substance\* the latter appears as a black spot, Iu fact\* by that only a part of the sun is unseen. Imagine that the opaque cover is quadrangular. Then it will have to be said that a quadrangular part of the sun is not being seen. In fact, that quadrangular thing is being known by the light of the smi. The relationship between the Seer and the seen is like that. To know an object (knowable) is not to know the Seer fully. l:or instance\* when <sup>1</sup> know blue it is realisation of a knowable. Blue is only a particular conglomeration of minute light elements. There is uo blueness iu the minutest particles or light monads. Blueings is known only from the particular form of collection. The miimtxst particles of light are without any colour. Its perception is only a modification or particular action of the ego. The Action of the ego really means the feeling that FI am liable to change\*. Change means a flow of ideas relating to Lap-W of previous condition\* and appearance of a subsequent condition. The subtlest indicator of change is K^ana (moment). Therefore, in reality\* the perception of blueness is appearance and disappearance of the ego in the flow of moments\* although ill ordinary conditions that disappearance is not noticeable. When the T-S\*tise disappears (i.\*. when the mind ceases to act) the Seer stays in Himself : when it appears the Seer looks liSie the thing seen. Thus between two closed states of the mind (when the Seer stays in Himself)\* iu the conception of the Seer not staying in Himself\*** *i.t***. iti the unreal view of llie Seer, is momentary perception of an object. The collective form of such perceptions is knowledge of blue etc\* Thus it is seen that knowledge of objects, that is\* perception oT a kuowablo\* is not to know the Seer in a particular way. The 'I -sense is primarily revealed by the Seer. The knowledge of blueness etc. is only a modified T-sense. In that way they are also revealed by the self-expression or absolute consciousness of the Seer.**