## **350** VOCA PHILOSOPHY OF PATAtV|AI.T

AIcIsb lias Hit1 property of sound. Sound is nothing but <sup>a</sup> formless flow of activity. Thinking; that the body is nothing but a collection of activities and is vacant like Ak^a, is thinking' of the relation between the body and <sup>A</sup> k:\sa, This is done by thinking of an unstruck sound (Au^hata-N'Ada) pervading the body. That is why ill another Sastta it has been said that by contemplation on a particular unstrticlt sound, movement to the sky is accomplished.

Again\* getting engrossed in the lightness of cotton wool or other similar light things the particles of the body lose their heaviness and become light. In fact\* the material things of the body like flesh and blood are really modifications of the T-sense, As heaviness is a modification of the T-seuse, so if by power of SamRdhi the opposite idea is conceived, the materials of the body change to lightness. From lightness of body and conquering the relationship between the body and Aka>a the power of unobstructed movement is acquired, resulting in the ability to move to the sky.

In spiritist literature it has been recorded that mediums went up the air during seance, A famous medium (D. D, Home) used to go up in the air likr this. During Privilyima, as the body is to be thought of light as air, it sometimes actually becomes light. Mention is made of this in Hallia Yoga literature. Mental contemplation is at the root of all these.

There is a deep truth underlying the fact that body become\* light by contemplation. Weight means movement towards the earth. According to the nature of material objects that movement, or force of that movement, is strong or weak in different things. What is a body or a material object ? It is nothing but a collection of minute particles, say the ancients. According to scientists these minute particles or atoms are but movements of electrons and protons. Between these two subtle entities there is a lot of gap {as between the ami and the planets), Klectron is going round proton many millions of times in a second. The electron and proton with the gap between them, appearing as one on account of its quick movement like a wheel of fire" is an atom. Therefore most part of the atom is empty. Scientists hold that if all the atoms constituting the body arc